29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

L 96/79

DIRECTIVE 2014/30/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 26 February 2014
on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to electromagnetic compatibility
(recast)
(Text with EEA relevance)

apply across sectoral legislation in order to provide a
coherent basis for revision or recasts of that legislation.
Directive 2004/108/EC should be adapted to that
Decision.

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, and in particular Article 114 thereof,
(4)

Member States should be responsible for ensuring that
radiocommunications,
including
radio
broadcast
reception and the amateur radio service operating in
accordance with International Telecommunication
Union (ITU) radio regulations, electrical supply
networks and telecommunications networks, as well as
equipment connected thereto, are protected against elec­
tromagnetic disturbance.

(5)

Provisions of national law ensuring protection against
electromagnetic disturbance need to be harmonised in
order to guarantee the free movement of electrical and
electronic apparatus without lowering justified levels of
protection in the Member States.

(6)

This Directive covers products which are new to the
Union market when they are placed on the market;
that is to say they are either new products made by a
manufacturer established in the Union or products,
whether new or second-hand, imported from a third
country.

(7)

This Directive should apply to all forms of supply,
including distance selling.

(8)

The equipment covered by this Directive should include
both apparatus and fixed installations. However, separate
provision should be made for each. This is so because,
whereas apparatus as such may move freely within the
Union, fixed installations on the other hand are installed
for permanent use at a predefined location, as assemblies
of various types of apparatus and, where appropriate,
other devices. The composition and function of such
installations correspond in most cases to the particular
needs of their operators.

(9)

Where this Directive regulates apparatus, it should apply
to finished apparatus placed on the market. Certain
components or sub-assemblies should, under certain
conditions, be considered to be apparatus if they are
made available to the end-user.

(10)

Radio equipment and telecommunications terminal
equipment should not be covered by this Directive

Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,
After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national
parliaments,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and
Social Committee (1),
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (2),
Whereas:
(1)

A number of amendments are to be made to Directive
2004/108/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 15 December 2004 on the approximation
of the laws of the Member States relating to electrom­
agnetic compatibility and repealing Directive 89/
336/EEC (3). In the interests of clarity, that Directive
should be recast.

(2)

Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting
out the requirements for accreditation and market
surveillance relating to the marketing of products (4)
lays down rules on the accreditation of conformity
assessment bodies, provides a framework for the
market surveillance of products and for controls on
products from third countries, and lays down the
general principles of the CE marking.

(3)

Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 9 July 2008 on a common
framework for the marketing of products (5), lays down
common principles and reference provisions intended to

(1) OJ C 181, 21.6.2012, p. 105.
(2) Position of the European Parliament of 5 February 2014 (not yet
published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of
20 February 2014.
(3) OJ L 390, 31.12.2004, p. 24.
(4) OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30.
(5) OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 82.

L 96/80

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

since they are already regulated by Directive 1999/5/EC
of the European Parliament and of the Council of
9 March 1999 on radio equipment and telecommuni­
cations terminal equipment and the mutual recognition
of their conformity (1). The electromagnetic compatibility
requirements in both Directives achieve the same level of
protection.
(11)

Aircraft or equipment intended to be fitted into aircraft
should not be covered by this Directive, since they are
already subject to special Union or international rules
governing electromagnetic compatibility.

(12)

This Directive should not regulate equipment which is
inherently benign in terms of electromagnetic compati­
bility.

(13)

This Directive should not deal with the safety of
equipment, since that is dealt with by separate Union
or national legislation.

(14)

Manufacturers of equipment intended to be connected to
networks should construct such equipment in a way that
prevents networks from suffering unacceptable degra­
dation of service when used under normal operating
conditions. Network operators should construct their
networks in such a way that manufacturers of
equipment liable to be connected to networks do not
suffer a disproportionate burden in order to prevent
networks from suffering an unacceptable degradation of
service. The European standardisation organisations
should take due account of that objective (including the
cumulative effects of the relevant types of electrom­
agnetic phenomena) when developing harmonised stan­
dards.

(15)

(16)

(17)

Protection against electromagnetic disturbance requires
obligations to be imposed on the various economic oper­
ators. Those obligations should be applied in a fair and
effective way in order to achieve such protection.
Economic operators should be responsible for the
compliance of apparatus with this Directive, in relation
to their respective roles in the supply chain, so as to
ensure a high level of protection of public interests
covered by this Directive, and to guarantee fair
competition on the Union market.
All economic operators intervening in the supply and
distribution chain should take appropriate measures to
ensure that they only make available on the market
apparatus which are in conformity with this Directive.
It is necessary to provide for a clear and proportionate
distribution of obligations which correspond to the role
of each economic operator in the supply and distribution
chain.

(1) OJ L 91, 7.4.1999, p. 10.

29.3.2014

(18)

In order to facilitate communication between economic
operators, market surveillance authorities and consumers,
Member States should encourage economic operators to
include a website address in addition to the postal
address.

(19)

The manufacturer, having detailed knowledge of the
design and production process, is best placed to carry
out the conformity assessment procedure. Conformity
assessment should therefore remain solely the obligation
of the manufacturer.

(20)

It is necessary to ensure that products from third
countries entering the Union market comply with this
Directive, and in particular that appropriate conformity
assessment procedures have been carried out by manu­
facturers with regard to those apparatus. Provision should
therefore be made for importers to make sure that the
apparatus they place on the market comply with the
requirements of this Directive and that they do not
place on the market apparatus which do not comply
with such requirements or present a risk. Provision
should also be made for importers to make sure that
conformity assessment procedures have been carried
out and that marking of apparatus and documentation
drawn up by manufacturers are available for inspection
by the competent national authorities.

(21)

When placing apparatus on the market, every importer
should indicate on the apparatus his name, registered
trade name or registered trade mark and the postal
address at which he can be contacted. Exceptions
should be provided for in cases where the size or
nature of the apparatus does not allow it. This includes
cases where the importer would have to open the
packaging to put his name and address on the apparatus.

(22)

The distributor makes apparatus available on the market
after it has been placed on the market by the manu­
facturer or the importer and should act with due care
to ensure that its handling of the apparatus does not
adversely affect the compliance of the apparatus.

(23)

Any economic operator that either places apparatus on
the market under his own name or trade mark or
modifies apparatus in such a way that compliance with
this Directive may be affected should be considered to be
the manufacturer and should assume the obligations of
the manufacturer.

(24)

Distributors and importers, being close to the market
place, should be involved in market surveillance tasks
carried out by the competent national authorities, and
should be prepared to participate actively, providing
those authorities with all necessary information relating
to the apparatus concerned.

29.3.2014

(25)

(26)

(27)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Ensuring traceability of apparatus throughout the whole
supply chain helps to make market surveillance simpler
and more efficient. An efficient traceability system
facilitates market surveillance authorities’ task of tracing
economic operators who made non-compliant apparatus
available on the market. When keeping the information
required under this Directive for the identification of
other economic operators, economic operators should
not be required to update such information in respect
of other economic operators who have either supplied
them with apparatus or to whom they have supplied
apparatus.

Fixed installations, including large machines and
networks, may generate electromagnetic disturbance, or
be affected by it. There may be an interface between fixed
installations and apparatus, and the electromagnetic
disturbances produced by fixed installations may affect
apparatus, and vice versa. In terms of electromagnetic
compatibility, it is irrelevant whether the electromagnetic
disturbance is produced by apparatus or by a fixed instal­
lation. Accordingly, fixed installations and apparatus
should be subject to a coherent and comprehensive
regime of essential requirements.

This Directive should be limited to the expression of the
essential requirements. In order to facilitate conformity
assessment with those requirements it is necessary to
provide for a presumption of conformity for equipment
which is in conformity with harmonised standards that
are adopted in accordance with Regulation (EU)
No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 25 October 2012 on European Standard­
isation (1) for the purpose of expressing detailed
technical specifications of those requirements.
Harmonised standards reflect the generally acknowledged
state of the art as regards electromagnetic compatibility
in the Union.

(28)

Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 provides for a procedure
for objections to harmonised standards where those
standards do not entirely satisfy the requirements of
this Directive.

(29)

In order to enable economic operators to demonstrate
and the competent authorities to ensure that apparatus
made available on the market conform to the essential
requirements, it is necessary to provide for conformity
assessment procedures. Decision No 768/2008/EC estab­
lishes modules for conformity assessment procedures,
which include procedures from the least to the most
stringent, in proportion to the level of risk involved. In
order to ensure inter-sectoral coherence and to avoid adhoc variants, conformity assessment procedures should
be chosen from among those modules.

(1) OJ L 316, 14.11.2012, p. 12.

L 96/81

(30)

The conformity assessment obligation should require the
manufacturer to perform an electromagnetic compati­
bility assessment of apparatus, based on relevant
phenomena, in order to determine whether or not it
meets the essential requirements of this Directive.

(31)

Where apparatus is capable of taking different configur­
ations, the electromagnetic compatibility assessment
should confirm whether the apparatus meets the
essential requirements in the configurations foreseeable
by the manufacturer as representative of normal use in
the intended applications. In such cases it should be
sufficient to perform an assessment on the basis of the
configuration most likely to cause maximum disturbance
and the configuration most susceptible to disturbance.

(32)

It is not appropriate to carry out the conformity
assessment of apparatus placed on the market for incor­
poration into a given fixed installation, and otherwise not
made available on the market, in isolation from the fixed
installation into which it is to be incorporated. Such
apparatus should therefore be exempted from the
conformity assessment procedures normally applicable
to apparatus. However, such apparatus should not be
permitted to compromise the conformity of the fixed
installation into which it is incorporated. Should
apparatus be incorporated into more than one identical
fixed installation, identifying the electromagnetic
compatibility characteristics of these installations should
be sufficient to ensure exemption from the conformity
assessment procedure.

(33)

Manufacturers should draw up an EU declaration of
conformity to provide information required under this
Directive on the conformity of an apparatus with this
Directive and with other relevant Union harmonisation
legislation.

(34)

To ensure effective access to information for market
surveillance purposes, the information required to
identify all applicable Union acts should be available in
a single EU declaration of conformity. In order to reduce
the administrative burden on economic operators, that
single EU declaration of conformity may be a dossier
made up of relevant individual declarations of
conformity.

(35)

The CE marking, indicating the conformity of apparatus,
is the visible consequence of a whole process comprising
conformity assessment in a broad sense. General prin­
ciples governing the CE marking are set out in Regu­
lation (EC) No 765/2008. Rules governing the affixing
of the CE marking should be laid down in this Directive.

(36)

Due to their specific characteristics, fixed installations
need not be subject to the affixing of the CE marking
or to the EU declaration of conformity.

L 96/82

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(37)

One of the conformity assessment procedures set out in
this Directive requires the intervention of conformity
assessment bodies, which are notified by the Member
States to the Commission.

(38)

Experience has shown that the criteria set out in
Directive 2004/108/EC that conformity assessment
bodies have to fulfil to be notified to the Commission
are not sufficient to ensure a uniformly high level of
performance of notified bodies throughout the Union.
It is, however, essential that all notified bodies perform
their functions to the same level and under conditions of
fair competition. That requires the setting of obligatory
requirements for conformity assessment bodies wishing
to be notified in order to provide conformity assessment
services.

(39)

If a conformity assessment body demonstrates
conformity with the criteria laid down in harmonised
standards, it should be presumed to comply with the
corresponding requirements set out in this Directive.

(40)

In order to ensure a consistent level of conformity
assessment quality it is also necessary to set requirements
for notifying authorities and other bodies involved in the
assessment, notification and monitoring of notified
bodies.

(41)

The system set out in this Directive should be comple­
mented by the accreditation system provided for in Regu­
lation (EC) No 765/2008. Since accreditation is an
essential means of verifying the competence of
conformity assessment bodies, it should also be used
for the purposes of notification.

(42)

Transparent accreditation as provided for in Regulation
(EC) No 765/2008, ensuring the necessary level of
confidence in certificates, should be considered by the
national public authorities throughout the Union as the
preferred means of demonstrating the technical
competence of conformity assessment bodies. However,
national authorities may consider that they possess the
appropriate means of carrying out that evaluation them­
selves. In such cases, in order to ensure the appropriate
level of credibility of evaluations carried out by other
national authorities, they should provide the Commission
and the other Member States with the necessary docu­
mentary evidence demonstrating the compliance of the
conformity assessment bodies evaluated with the relevant
regulatory requirements.

(43)

Conformity assessment bodies frequently subcontract
parts of their activities linked to the assessment of
conformity or have recourse to a subsidiary. In order
to safeguard the level of protection required for the
apparatus to be placed on the Union market, it is
essential that conformity assessment subcontractors and
subsidiaries fulfil the same requirements as notified
bodies in relation to the performance of conformity

29.3.2014

assessment tasks. Therefore, it is important that the
assessment of the competence and the performance of
bodies to be notified and the monitoring of bodies
already notified cover also activities carried out by
subcontractors and subsidiaries.

(44)

It is necessary to increase the efficiency and transparency
of the notification procedure and, in particular, to adapt
it to new technologies so as to enable online notification.

(45)

Since notified bodies may offer their services throughout
the Union, it is appropriate to give the other Member
States and the Commission the opportunity to raise
objections concerning a notified body. It is therefore
important to provide for a period during which any
doubts or concerns as to the competence of conformity
assessment bodies can be clarified before they start
operating as notified bodies.

(46)

In the interests of competitiveness, it is crucial that
notified bodies apply the conformity assessment
procedures without creating unnecessary burdens for
economic operators. For the same reason, and to
ensure equal treatment of economic operators,
consistency in the technical application of the conformity
assessment procedures needs to be ensured. That can best
be achieved through appropriate coordination and
cooperation between notified bodies.

(47)

In order to ensure legal certainty, it is necessary to clarify
that rules on Union market surveillance and control of
products entering the Union market provided for in
Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 apply to apparatus
covered by this Directive. This Directive should not
prevent Member States from choosing the competent
authorities to carry out those tasks.

(48)

Directive 2004/108/EC already provides for a safeguard
procedure. In order to increase transparency and to
reduce processing time, it is necessary to improve the
existing safeguard procedure, with a view to making it
more efficient and drawing on the expertise available in
Member States.

(49)

The existing system should be supplemented by a
procedure under which interested parties are informed
of measures intended to be taken with regard to
apparatus presenting a risk to aspects of public interest
protection covered by this Directive. It should also allow
market surveillance authorities, in cooperation with the
relevant economic operators, to act at an earlier stage in
respect of such apparatus.

(50)

Where the Member States and the Commission agree as
to the justification of a measure taken by a Member
State, no further involvement of the Commission
should be required, except where non-compliance can
be attributed to shortcomings of a harmonised standard.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(51)

In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implemen­
tation of this Directive, implementing powers should be
conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be
exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU)
No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules
and general principles concerning mechanisms for
control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise
of implementing powers (1).

(52)

The advisory procedure should be used for the adoption
of implementing acts requesting the notifying Member
State to take the necessary corrective measures in
respect of notified bodies that do not meet or no
longer meet the requirements for their notification.

(53)

(54)

In line with established practice, the committee set up by
this Directive can play a useful role in examining matters
concerning the application of this Directive raised either
by its chair or by a representative of a Member State in
accordance with its rules of procedure
When matters relating to this Directive, other than its
implementation or infringements, are being examined,
i.e. in a Commission expert group, the European
Parliament should in line with existing practice receive
full information and documentation and, where appro­
priate, an invitation to attend such meetings.

L 96/83

equipment to comply with an adequate level of electrom­
agnetic compatibility, cannot be sufficiently achieved by
the Member States but can rather, by reason of its scale
and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the Union
may adopt measures, in accordance with the principle of
subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the Treaty on
European Union. In accordance with the principle of
proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Directive
does not go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve
that objective.

(59)

The obligation to transpose this Directive into national
law should be confined to those provisions which
represent a substantive amendment as compared to the
earlier Directive. The obligation to transpose the
provisions which are unchanged arises under the earlier
Directive.

(60)

This Directive should be without prejudice to the
obligations of the Member States relating to the timelimits for transposition into national law and the dates
of application of the Directive set out in Annex V,

HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS

(55)

(56)

(57)

(58)

The Commission should, by means of implementing acts
and, given their special nature, acting without the appli­
cation of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, determine
whether measures taken by Member States in respect of
non-compliant apparatus are justified or not.
Member States should lay down rules on penalties
applicable to infringements of the provisions of
national law adopted pursuant to this Directive and
ensure that those rules are enforced. The penalties
provided for should be effective, proportionate and
dissuasive.
It is necessary to provide for reasonable transitional
arrangements that allow the making available on the
market and putting into service, without the need to
comply with further product requirements, of apparatus
that has already been placed on the market in accordance
with Directive 2004/108/EC before the date of appli­
cation of national measures transposing this Directive.
Distributors should therefore be able to supply
apparatus that has been placed on the market, namely
stock that is already in the distribution chain, before the
date of application of national measures transposing this
Directive.
Since the objective of this Directive, namely to ensure the
functioning of the internal market by requiring

(1) OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13.

Article 1
Subject matter
This Directive regulates the electromagnetic compatibility of
equipment. It aims to ensure the functioning of the internal
market by requiring equipment to comply with an adequate
level of electromagnetic compatibility.
Article 2
Scope
1.
This Directive shall apply to equipment as defined in
Article 3.
2.

This Directive shall not apply to:

(a) equipment covered by Directive 1999/5/EC;
(b) aeronautical products, parts and appliances as referred to in
Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 20 February 2008 on common rules
in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European
Aviation Safety Agency, and repealing Council Directive
91/670/EEC, Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002 and Directive
2004/36/EC (2);
(2) OJ L 79, 19.3.2008, p. 1.

L 96/84

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(c) radio equipment used by radio amateurs within the meaning
of the Radio Regulations adopted in the framework of the
Constitution of the International Telecommunication Union
and the Convention of the International Telecommunication
Union (1), unless the equipment is made available on the
market;
(d) equipment the inherent nature of the physical characteristics
of which is such that:
(i) it is incapable of generating or contributing to electrom­
agnetic emissions which exceed a level allowing radio
and telecommunication equipment and other equipment
to operate as intended; and
(ii) it operates without unacceptable degradation in the
presence of the electromagnetic disturbance normally
consequent upon its intended use;
(e) custom built evaluation kits destined for professionals to be
used solely at research and development facilities for such
purposes.
For the purposes of point (c) of the first subparagraph, kits of
components to be assembled by radio amateurs and equipment
made available on the market and modified by and for the use
of radio amateurs are not regarded as equipment made available
on the market.
3.
Where, for the equipment referred to in paragraph 1, the
essential requirements set out in Annex I are wholly or partly
laid down more specifically by other Union legislation, this
Directive shall not apply, or shall cease to apply, to that
equipment in respect of such requirements from the date of
implementation of that Union legislation.
4.
This Directive shall not affect the application of Union or
national legislation regulating the safety of equipment.
Article 3
Definitions
1.
For the purposes of this Directive, the following defi­
nitions shall apply:
(1) ‘equipment’ means any apparatus or fixed installation;
(2) ‘apparatus’ means any finished appliance or combination
thereof made available on the market as a single functional
unit, intended for the end-user and liable to generate elec­
tromagnetic disturbance, or the performance of which is
liable to be affected by such disturbance;
(1) Constitution and Convention of the International Telecommuni­
cation Union adopted by the Additional Plenipotentiary Conference
(Geneva, 1992) as amended by the Plenipotentiary Conference
(Kyoto, 1994).

29.3.2014

(3) ‘fixed installation’ means a particular combination of
several types of apparatus and, where applicable, other
devices, which are assembled, installed and intended to
be used permanently at a predefined location;

(4) ‘electromagnetic compatibility’ means the ability of
equipment to function satisfactorily in its electromagnetic
environment without introducing intolerable electrom­
agnetic disturbances to other equipment in that
environment;

(5) ‘electromagnetic disturbance’ means any electromagnetic
phenomenon which may degrade the performance of
equipment; an electromagnetic disturbance may be elec­
tromagnetic noise, an unwanted signal or a change in
the propagation medium itself;

(6) ‘immunity’ means the ability of equipment to perform as
intended without degradation in the presence of an elec­
tromagnetic disturbance;

(7) ‘safety purposes’ means the purposes of safeguarding
human life or property;

(8) ‘electromagnetic environment’ means all electromagnetic
phenomena observable in a given location;

(9) ‘making available on the market’ means any supply of
apparatus for distribution, consumption or use on the
Union market in the course of a commercial activity,
whether in return for payment or free of charge;

(10) ‘placing on the market’ means the first making available of
apparatus on the Union market;

(11) ‘manufacturer’ means any natural or legal person who
manufactures apparatus or has apparatus designed or
manufactured, and markets that apparatus under his
name or trade mark;

(12) ‘authorised representative’ means any natural or legal
person established within the Union who has received a
written mandate from a manufacturer to act on his behalf
in relation to specified tasks;

(13) ‘importer’ means any natural or legal person established
within the Union who places apparatus from a third
country on the Union market;

(14) ‘distributor’ means any natural or legal person in the
supply chain, other than the manufacturer or the
importer, who makes apparatus available on the market;

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(15) ‘economic operators’ means the manufacturer, the auth­
orised representative, the importer and the distributor;

(16) ‘technical specification’ means a document that prescribes
technical requirements to be fulfilled by the equipment;

L 96/85

(2) ‘mobile installations’ defined as a combination of apparatus
and, where applicable, other devices, intended to be moved
and operated in a range of locations.

Article 4
Making available on the market and/or putting into service

(17) ‘harmonised standard’ means harmonised standard as
defined in point (c) of point 1 of Article 2 of Regulation
(EU) No 1025/2012;

Member States shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that
equipment is made available on the market and/or put into
service only if it complies with this Directive when properly
installed, maintained and used for its intended purpose.

(18) ‘accreditation’ means accreditation as defined in point 10
of Article 2 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008;

Article 5
Free movement of equipment

(19) ‘national accreditation body’ means national accreditation
body as defined in point 11 of Article 2 of Regulation (EC)
No 765/2008;

(20) ‘conformity assessment’ means the process demonstrating
whether the essential requirements of this Directive
relating to an apparatus have been fulfilled;

(21) ‘conformity assessment body’ means a body that performs
conformity assessment activities including calibration,
testing, certification and inspection;

(22) ‘recall’ means any measure aimed at achieving the return of
apparatus that has already been made available to the enduser;

(23) ‘withdrawal’ means any measure aimed at preventing
apparatus in the supply chain from being made available
on the market;

(24) ‘Union harmonisation legislation’ means any Union legis­
lation harmonising the conditions for the marketing of
products;

(25) ‘CE marking’ means a marking by which the manufacturer
indicates that the apparatus is in conformity with the
applicable requirements set out in Union harmonisation
legislation providing for its affixing.

2.
For the purposes of this Directive, the following shall be
considered as apparatus:

(1) ‘components’ or ‘sub-assemblies’ intended for incorporation
into an apparatus by the end-user, which are liable to
generate electromagnetic disturbance, or the performance
of which is liable to be affected by such disturbance;

1.
Member States shall not impede, for reasons relating to
electromagnetic compatibility, the making available on the
market and/or the putting into service in their territory of
equipment which complies with this Directive.

2.
The requirements of this Directive shall not prevent the
application in any Member State of the following special
measures concerning the putting into service or use of
equipment:

(a) measures to overcome an existing or predicted electrom­
agnetic compatibility problem at a specific site;

(b) measures taken for safety reasons to protect public telecom­
munications networks or receiving or transmitting stations
when used for safety purposes in well-defined spectrum
situations.

Without prejudice to Directive 98/34/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 22 June 1998 laying down
a procedure for the provision of information in the field of
technical standards and regulations (1), Member States shall
notify those special measures to the Commission and to the
other Member States.

The special measures which have been accepted shall be
published by the Commission in the Official Journal of the
European Union.

3.
Member States shall not create any obstacles to the display
and/or demonstration at trade fairs, exhibitions or similar events
of equipment which does not comply with this Directive,
provided that a visible sign clearly indicates that such
equipment may not be made available on the market and/or
put into service until it has been brought into conformity with
this Directive. Demonstration may only take place provided that
adequate measures have been taken to avoid electromagnetic
disturbances.
(1) OJ L 204, 21.7.1998, p. 37.

L 96/86

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 6
Essential requirements
The equipment shall meet the essential requirements set out in
Annex I.

CHAPTER 2
OBLIGATIONS OF ECONOMIC OPERATORS

Article 7
Obligations of manufacturers
1.
When placing their apparatus on the market, manufac­
turers shall ensure that they have been designed and manu­
factured in accordance with the essential requirements set out
in Annex I.

2.
Manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation
referred to in Annex II or Annex III and carry out the relevant
conformity assessment procedure referred to in Article 14 or
have it carried out.

Where compliance of apparatus with the applicable
requirements has been demonstrated by that procedure, manu­
facturers shall draw up an EU declaration of conformity and
affix the CE marking.

3.
Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation and
the EU declaration of conformity for 10 years after the
apparatus has been placed on the market.

4.
Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for
series production to remain in conformity with this Directive.
Changes in apparatus design or characteristics and changes in
the harmonised standards or in other technical specifications by
reference to which conformity of apparatus is declared shall be
adequately taken into account.

5.
Manufacturers shall ensure that apparatus which they have
placed on the market bear a type, batch or serial number or
other element allowing their identification, or, where the size or
nature of the apparatus does not allow it, that the required
information is provided on the packaging or in a document
accompanying the apparatus.

6.
Manufacturers shall indicate, on the apparatus, their name,
registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal
address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not
possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the
apparatus. The address shall indicate a single point at which the
manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details shall be in a
language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance
authorities.

29.3.2014

7.
Manufacturers shall ensure that the apparatus is accom­
panied by instructions and the information referred to in
Article 18 in a language which can be easily understood by
consumers and other end-users, as determined by the Member
State concerned. Such instructions and information, as well as
any labelling, shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.
8.
Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that
an apparatus which they have placed on the market is not in
conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the
corrective measures necessary to bring that apparatus into
conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate.
Furthermore, where the apparatus presents a risk, manufacturers
shall immediately inform the competent national authorities of
the Member States in which they made the apparatus available
on the market to that effect, giving details, in particular, of the
non-compliance and of any corrective measures taken.
9.
Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a
competent national authority, provide it with all the
information and documentation in paper or electronic form
necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the apparatus
with this Directive, in a language which can be easily
understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with that
authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate the
risks posed by apparatus which they have placed on the market.
Article 8
Authorised representatives
1.
A manufacturer may, by a written mandate, appoint an
authorised representative.
The obligations laid down in Article 7(1) and the obligation to
draw up technical documentation referred to in Article 7(2)
shall not form part of the authorised representative’s mandate.
2.
An authorised representative shall perform the tasks
specified in the mandate received from the manufacturer. The
mandate shall allow the authorised representative to do at least
the following:
(a) keep the EU declaration of conformity and the technical
documentation at the disposal of national market
surveillance authorities for 10 years after the apparatus
has been placed on the market;
(b) further to a reasoned request from a competent national
authority, provide that authority with all the information
and documentation necessary to demonstrate the
conformity of the apparatus;
(c) cooperate with the competent national authorities, at their
request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by
the apparatus covered by the authorised representative’s
mandate.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 9
Obligations of importers
1.
Importers shall place only compliant apparatus on the
market.
2.
Before placing apparatus on the market importers shall
ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure
referred to in Article 14 has been carried out by the manu­
facturer. They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up
the technical documentation, that the apparatus bears the CE
marking and is accompanied by the required documents, and
that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements set
out in Article 7(5) and (6).
Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that
apparatus is not in conformity with the essential requirements
set out in Annex I, he shall not place the apparatus on the
market until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore,
where the apparatus presents a risk, the importer shall inform
the manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that
effect.
3.
Importers shall indicate on the apparatus their name,
registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal
address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not
possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying the
apparatus. The contact details shall be in a language easily
understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.
4.
Importers shall ensure that the apparatus is accompanied
by instructions and the information referred to in Article 18 in
a language which can be easily understood by consumers and
other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
5.
Importers shall ensure that, while an apparatus is under
their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not
jeopardise its compliance with the essential requirements set out
in Annex I.
6.
Importers who consider or have reason to believe that an
apparatus which they have placed on the market is not in
conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the
corrective measures necessary to bring that apparatus into
conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate.
Furthermore, where the apparatus presents a risk, importers
shall immediately inform the competent national authorities
of the Member States in which they made the apparatus
available on the market to that effect, giving details, in
particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective
measures taken.
7.
Importers shall, for 10 years after the apparatus has been
placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU declaration of
conformity at the disposal of the market surveillance authorities
and ensure that the technical documentation can be made
available to those authorities, upon request.

L 96/87

8.
Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a
competent national authority, provide it with all the
information and documentation in paper or electronic form,
necessary to demonstrate the conformity of apparatus in a
language which can be easily understood by that authority.
They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on
any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by apparatus
which they have placed on the market.

Article 10
Obligations of distributors
1.
When making apparatus available on the market
distributors shall act with due care in relation to the
requirements of this Directive.

2.
Before making apparatus available on the market
distributors shall verify that the apparatus bears the CE
marking, that it is accompanied by the required documents
and by instructions and the information referred to in Article 18
in a language which can be easily understood by consumers and
other end-users in the Member State in which the apparatus is
to be made available on the market and that the manufacturer
and the importer have complied with the requirements set out
in Article 7(5) and (6) and Article 9(3) respectively.

Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that
apparatus is not in conformity with the essential requirements
set out in Annex I, he shall not make the apparatus available on
the market until it has been brought into conformity.
Furthermore, where the apparatus presents a risk, the distributor
shall inform the manufacturer or the importer to that effect as
well as the market surveillance authorities.

3.
Distributors shall ensure that, while apparatus is under
their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do not
jeopardise its compliance with the essential requirements set out
in Annex I.

4.
Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that
apparatus which they have made available on the market is not
in conformity with this Directive shall make sure that the
corrective measures necessary to bring that apparatus into
conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate, are
taken. Furthermore, where the apparatus presents a risk,
distributors shall immediately inform the competent national
authorities of the Member States in which they made the
apparatus available on the market to that effect, giving details,
in particular, of the non-compliance and of any corrective
measures taken.

5.
Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a
competent national authority, provide it with all the
information and documentation in paper or electronic form,
necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the apparatus.
They shall cooperate with that authority, at its request, on
any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by apparatus
which they have made available on the market.

L 96/88

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 11
Cases in which obligations of manufacturers apply to
importers and distributors
An importer or distributor shall be considered a manufacturer
for the purposes of this Directive and he shall be subject to the
obligations of the manufacturer under Article 7, where he
places apparatus on the market under his name or trade
mark or modifies apparatus already placed on the market in
such a way that compliance with this Directive may be affected.

29.3.2014

aspects of the essential requirements, provided that for the other
aspects of the essential requirements the procedure referred to
in point (a) of the first paragraph is applied.

Article 15
EU declaration of conformity
1.
The EU declaration of conformity shall state that the
fulfilment of the essential requirements set out in Annex I has
been demonstrated.

Article 12
Identification of economic operators
Economic operators shall, on request, identify the following to
the market surveillance authorities:
(a) any economic operator who has supplied them with
apparatus;
(b) any economic operator to whom they have supplied
apparatus.
Economic operators shall be able to present the information
referred to in the first paragraph for 10 years after they have
been supplied with the apparatus and for 10 years after they
have supplied the apparatus.
CHAPTER 3

2.
The EU declaration of conformity shall have the model
structure set out in Annex IV, shall contain the elements
specified in the relevant modules set out in Annexes II and III
and shall be continuously updated. It shall be translated into the
language or languages required by the Member State in which
the apparatus is placed or made available on the market.

3.
Where apparatus is subject to more than one Union act
requiring an EU declaration of conformity, a single EU
declaration of conformity shall be drawn up in respect of all
such Union acts. That declaration shall contain the identification
of the Union acts concerned including their publication refer­
ences.

4.
By drawing up the EU declaration of conformity, the
manufacturer shall assume responsibility for the compliance
of the apparatus with the requirements laid down in this
Directive.

CONFORMITY OF EQUIPMENT

Article 13
Presumption of conformity of equipment
Equipment which is in conformity with harmonised standards
or parts thereof the references of which have been published in
the Official Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to be
in conformity with the essential requirements set out in Annex I
covered by those standards or parts thereof.

Article 16
General principles of the CE marking
The CE marking shall be subject to the general principles set out
in Article 30 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.

Article 17
Article 14

Rules and conditions for affixing the CE marking

Conformity assessment procedures for apparatus

1.
The CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and
indelibly to the apparatus or to its data plate. Where that is
not possible or not warranted on account of the nature of the
apparatus, it shall be affixed to the packaging and to the accom­
panying documents.

Compliance of apparatus with the essential requirements set out
in Annex I shall be demonstrated by means of either of the
following conformity assessment procedures:
(a) internal production control set out in Annex II;

2.
The CE marking shall be affixed before the apparatus is
placed on the market.

(b) EU type examination that is followed by Conformity to type
based on internal production control set out in Annex III.
The manufacturer may choose to restrict the application of the
procedure referred to in point (b) of the first paragraph to some

3.
Member States shall build upon existing mechanisms to
ensure correct application of the regime governing the CE
marking and shall take appropriate action in the event of
improper use of that marking.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 18
Information concerning the use of apparatus
1.
Apparatus shall be accompanied by information on any
specific precautions that must be taken when the apparatus is
assembled, installed, maintained or used, in order to ensure that,
when put into service, the apparatus is in conformity with the
essential requirements set out in point 1 of Annex I.

2.
Apparatus for which compliance with the essential
requirements set out in point 1 of Annex I is not ensured in
residential areas shall be accompanied by a clear indication of
such restriction of use, where appropriate also on the pack­
aging.

L 96/89

Where non-compliance is established, the competent authorities
shall impose appropriate measures to bring the fixed installation
into compliance with the essential requirements set out in
Annex I.

3.
Member States shall set out the necessary provisions for
identifying the person or persons responsible for the estab­
lishment of compliance of a fixed installation with the
relevant essential requirements.

CHAPTER 4
NOTIFICATION OF CONFORMITY ASSESSMENT BODIES

Article 20
Notification

3.
The information required to enable apparatus to be used
in accordance with the intended purpose of the apparatus shall
be included in the instructions accompanying the apparatus.

Member States shall notify the Commission and the other
Member States of bodies authorised to carry out third-party
conformity assessment tasks under this Directive.

Article 19

Article 21

Fixed installations

Notifying authorities

1.
Apparatus which has been made available on the market
and which may be incorporated into a fixed installation shall be
subject to all relevant provisions for apparatus set out in this
Directive.

1.
Member States shall designate a notifying authority that
shall be responsible for setting up and carrying out the
necessary procedures for the assessment and notification of
conformity assessment bodies and the monitoring of notified
bodies, including compliance with Article 26.

However, the requirements of Articles 6 to 12 and Articles 14
to 18 shall not be compulsory in the case of apparatus which is
intended for incorporation into a particular fixed installation
and is otherwise not made available on the market.

2.
Member States may decide that the assessment and moni­
toring referred to in paragraph 1 shall be carried out by a
national accreditation body within the meaning of and in
accordance with Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.

In such cases, the accompanying documentation shall identify
the fixed installation and its electromagnetic compatibility char­
acteristics and shall indicate the precautions to be taken for the
incorporation of the apparatus into the fixed installation in
order not to compromise the conformity of that installation.
It shall also include the information referred to in Article 7(5)
and (6) and Article 9(3).

The good engineering practices referred to in point 2 of Annex
I shall be documented and the documentation shall be held by
the person or persons responsible at the disposal of the relevant
national authorities for inspection for as long as the fixed instal­
lation is in operation.

2.
Where there are indications of non-compliance of the
fixed installation, in particular, where there are complaints
about disturbances being generated by the installation, the
competent authorities of the Member State concerned may
request evidence of compliance of the fixed installation, and,
when appropriate, initiate an evaluation.

3.
Where the notifying authority delegates or otherwise
entrusts the assessment, notification or monitoring referred to
in paragraph 1 to a body which is not a governmental entity,
that body shall be a legal entity and shall comply mutatis
mutandis with the requirements laid down in Article 22. In
addition it shall have arrangements to cover liabilities arising
out of its activities.

4.
The notifying authority shall take full responsibility for the
tasks performed by the body referred to in paragraph 3.

Article 22
Requirements relating to notifying authorities
1.
A notifying authority shall be established in such a way
that no conflict of interest with conformity assessment bodies
occurs.

2.
A notifying authority shall be organised and operated so
as to safeguard the objectivity and impartiality of its activities.

L 96/90

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

3.
A notifying authority shall be organised in such a way
that each decision relating to notification of a conformity
assessment body is taken by competent persons different
from those who carried out the assessment.
4.
A notifying authority shall not offer or provide any
activities that conformity assessment bodies perform or
consultancy services on a commercial or competitive basis.
5.
A notifying authority shall safeguard the confidentiality of
the information it obtains.
6.
A notifying authority shall have a sufficient number of
competent personnel at its disposal for the proper performance
of its tasks.
Article 23
Information obligation on notifying authorities
Member States shall inform the Commission of their procedures
for the assessment and notification of conformity assessment
bodies and the monitoring of notified bodies, and of any
changes thereto.
The Commission shall make that information publicly available.
Article 24
Requirements relating to notified bodies
1.
For the purposes of notification, a conformity assessment
body shall meet the requirements laid down in paragraphs 2
to 11.
2.
A conformity assessment body shall be established under
national law of a Member State and have legal personality.
3.
A conformity assessment body shall be a third-party body
independent of the organisation or the apparatus it assesses.
A body belonging to a business association or professional
federation representing undertakings involved in the design,
manufacturing, provision, assembly, use or maintenance of
apparatus which it assesses, may, on condition that its inde­
pendence and the absence of any conflict of interest are demon­
strated, be considered such a body.
4.
A conformity assessment body, its top level management
and the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity
assessment tasks shall not be the designer, manufacturer,
supplier, installer, purchaser, owner, user or maintainer of the
apparatus which they assess, nor the representative of any of
those parties. This shall not preclude the use of assessed
apparatus that are necessary for the operations of the
conformity assessment body or the use of such apparatus for
personal purposes.

29.3.2014

A conformity assessment body, its top level management and
the personnel responsible for carrying out the conformity
assessment tasks shall not be directly involved in the design,
manufacture or construction, the marketing, installation, use or
maintenance of those apparatus, or represent the parties
engaged in those activities. They shall not engage in any
activity that may conflict with their independence of
judgement or integrity in relation to conformity assessment
activities for which they are notified. This shall in particular
apply to consultancy services.

Conformity assessment bodies shall ensure that the activities of
their subsidiaries or subcontractors do not affect the confiden­
tiality, objectivity or impartiality of their conformity assessment
activities.

5.
Conformity assessment bodies and their personnel shall
carry out the conformity assessment activities with the highest
degree of professional integrity and the requisite technical
competence in the specific field and shall be free from all
pressures and inducements, particularly financial, which might
influence their judgement or the results of their conformity
assessment activities, especially as regards persons or groups
of persons with an interest in the results of those activities.

6.
A conformity assessment body shall be capable of
carrying out all the conformity assessment tasks assigned to it
by Annex III and in relation to which it has been notified,
whether those tasks are carried out by the conformity
assessment body itself or on its behalf and under its responsi­
bility.

At all times and for each conformity assessment procedure and
each kind or category of apparatus in relation to which it has
been notified, a conformity assessment body shall have at its
disposal the necessary:

(a) personnel with technical knowledge and sufficient and
appropriate experience to perform the conformity
assessment tasks;

(b) descriptions of procedures in accordance with which
conformity assessment is carried out, ensuring the trans­
parency and the ability of reproduction of those procedures.
It shall have appropriate policies and procedures in place
that distinguish between tasks it carries out as a notified
body and other activities;

(c) procedures for the performance of activities which take due
account of the size of an undertaking, the sector in which it
operates, its structure, the degree of complexity of the
apparatus technology in question and the mass or serial
nature of the production process.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

A conformity assessment body shall have the means necessary
to perform the technical and administrative tasks connected
with the conformity assessment activities in an appropriate
manner and shall have access to all necessary equipment or
facilities.

L 96/91

harmonisation legislation and shall apply as general guidance
the administrative decisions and documents produced as a result
of the work of that group.
Article 25

7.
The personnel responsible for carrying out conformity
assessment tasks shall have the following:

(a) sound technical and vocational training covering all the
conformity assessment activities in relation to which the
conformity assessment body has been notified;

(b) satisfactory knowledge of the requirements of the
assessments they carry out and adequate authority to
carry out those assessments;

(c) appropriate knowledge and understanding of the essential
requirements set out in Annex I, of the applicable
harmonised standards and of the relevant provisions of
Union harmonisation legislation and of national legislation;

(d) the ability to draw up certificates, records and reports
demonstrating that assessments have been carried out.

8.
The impartiality of the conformity assessment bodies, their
top level management and of the personnel responsible for
carrying out the conformity assessment tasks shall be guar­
anteed.

The remuneration of the top level management and personnel
responsible for carrying out the conformity assessment tasks of
a conformity assessment body shall not depend on the number
of assessments carried out or on the results of those assess­
ments.

Presumption of conformity of notified bodies
Where a conformity assessment body demonstrates its
conformity with the criteria laid down in the relevant
harmonised standards or parts thereof the references of which
have been published in the Official Journal of the European Union
it shall be presumed to comply with the requirements set out in
Article 24 in so far as the applicable harmonised standards
cover those requirements.
Article 26
Subsidiaries of and subcontracting by notified bodies
1.
Where a notified body subcontracts specific tasks
connected with conformity assessment or has recourse to a
subsidiary, it shall ensure that the subcontractor or the
subsidiary meets the requirements set out in Article 24 and
shall inform the notifying authority accordingly.
2.
Notified bodies shall take full responsibility for the tasks
performed by subcontractors or subsidiaries wherever these are
established.
3.
Activities may be subcontracted or carried out by a
subsidiary only with the agreement of the client.
4.
Notified bodies shall keep at the disposal of the notifying
authority the relevant documents concerning the assessment of
the qualifications of the subcontractor or the subsidiary and the
work carried out by them under Annex III.
Article 27
Application for notification

9.
Conformity assessment bodies shall take out liability
insurance unless liability is assumed by the State in accordance
with national law, or the Member State itself is directly
responsible for the conformity assessment.

1.
A conformity assessment body shall submit an application
for notification to the notifying authority of the Member State
in which it is established.

10.
The personnel of a conformity assessment body shall
observe professional secrecy with regard to all information
obtained in carrying out their tasks under Annex III or any
provision of national law giving effect to it, except in relation
to the competent authorities of the Member State in which its
activities are carried out. Proprietary rights shall be protected.

2.
The application for notification shall be accompanied by a
description of the conformity assessment activities, the
conformity assessment module or modules and the apparatus
for which that body claims to be competent, as well as by an
accreditation certificate, where one exists, issued by a national
accreditation body attesting that the conformity assessment
body fulfils the requirements laid down in Article 24.

11.
Conformity assessment bodies shall participate in, or
ensure that their personnel responsible for carrying out the
conformity assessment tasks are informed of, the relevant
standardisation activities and the activities of the notified body
coordination group established under the relevant Union

3.
Where the conformity assessment body concerned cannot
provide an accreditation certificate, it shall provide the notifying
authority with all the documentary evidence necessary for the
verification, recognition and regular monitoring of its
compliance with the requirements laid down in Article 24.

L 96/92

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

29.3.2014

Article 28

Article 30

Notification procedure

Changes to notifications

1.
Notifying authorities may notify only conformity
assessment bodies which have satisfied the requirements laid
down in Article 24.

1.
Where a notifying authority has ascertained or has been
informed that a notified body no longer meets the requirements
laid down in Article 24, or that it is failing to fulfil its
obligations, the notifying authority shall restrict, suspend or
withdraw notification as appropriate, depending on the seri­
ousness of the failure to meet those requirements or fulfil
those obligations. It shall immediately inform the Commission
and the other Member States accordingly.

2.
They shall notify the Commission and the other Member
States using the electronic notification tool developed and
managed by the Commission.
3.
The notification shall include full details of the conformity
assessment activities, the conformity assessment module or
modules and apparatus concerned and the relevant attestation
of competence.
4.
Where a notification is not based on an accreditation
certificate as referred to in Article 27(2), the notifying
authority shall provide the Commission and the other
Member States with documentary evidence which attests to
the conformity assessment body’s competence and the
arrangements in place to ensure that that body will be
monitored regularly and will continue to satisfy the
requirements laid down in Article 24.
5.
The body concerned may perform the activities of a
notified body only where no objections are raised by the
Commission or the other Member States within two weeks of
a notification where an accreditation certificate is used or within
two months of a notification where accreditation is not used.
Only such a body shall be considered a notified body for the
purposes of this Directive.
6.
The notifying authority shall notify the Commission and
the other Member States of any subsequent relevant changes to
the notification.
Article 29

2.
In the event of restriction, suspension or withdrawal of
notification, or where the notified body has ceased its activity,
the notifying Member State shall take appropriate steps to
ensure that the files of that body are either processed by
another notified body or kept available for the responsible
notifying and market surveillance authorities at their request.
Article 31
Challenge of the competence of notified bodies
1.
The Commission shall investigate all cases where it
doubts, or doubt is brought to its attention regarding, the
competence of a notified body or the continued fulfilment by
a notified body of the requirements and responsibilities to
which it is subject.
2.
The notifying Member State shall provide the
Commission, on request, with all information relating to the
basis for the notification or the maintenance of the competence
of the notified body concerned.
3.
The Commission shall ensure that all sensitive information
obtained in the course of its investigations is treated confiden­
tially.
4.
Where the Commission ascertains that a notified body
does not meet or no longer meets the requirements for its
notification, it shall adopt an implementing act requesting the
notifying Member State to take the necessary corrective
measures, including withdrawal of notification if necessary.

Identification numbers and lists of notified bodies
1.
The Commission shall assign an identification number to
a notified body.

That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the
advisory procedure referred to in Article 41(2).

It shall assign a single such number even where the body is
notified under several Union acts.

Article 32

2.
The Commission shall make publicly available the list of
the bodies notified under this Directive, including the identifi­
cation numbers that have been assigned to them and the
activities for which they have been notified.
The Commission shall ensure that the list is kept up to date.

Operational obligations of notified bodies
1.
Notified bodies shall carry out conformity assessments in
accordance with the conformity assessment procedures provided
for in Annex III.
2.
Conformity assessments shall be carried out in a propor­
tionate manner, avoiding unnecessary burdens for economic
operators.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Conformity assessment bodies shall perform their activities
taking due account of the size of an undertaking, the sector
in which it operates, its structure, the degree of complexity of
the apparatus technology in question and the mass or serial
nature of the production process.

L 96/93

activities covering the same apparatus with relevant information
on issues relating to negative and, on request, positive
conformity assessment results.
Article 35

In so doing they shall nevertheless respect the degree of rigour
and the level of protection required for the compliance of the
apparatus with this Directive.
3.
Where a notified body finds that the essential
requirements set out in Annex I or corresponding harmonised
standards or other technical specifications have not been met by
a manufacturer, it shall require that manufacturer to take appro­
priate corrective measures and shall not issue a certificate.
4.
Where, in the course of the monitoring of conformity
following the issue of a certificate, a notified body finds that
an apparatus no longer complies, it shall require the manu­
facturer to take appropriate corrective measures and shall
suspend or withdraw the certificate if necessary.
5.
Where corrective measures are not taken or do not have
the required effect, the notified body shall restrict, suspend or
withdraw any certificates, as appropriate.
Article 33
Appeal against decisions of notified bodies
Member States shall ensure that an appeal procedure against
decisions of the notified bodies is available.
Article 34

Exchange of experience
The Commission shall provide for the organisation of exchange
of experience between the Member States’ national authorities
responsible for notification policy.
Article 36
Coordination of notified bodies
The Commission shall ensure that appropriate coordination and
cooperation between bodies notified under this Directive are put
in place and properly operated in the form of a sectoral group
of notified bodies.
Member States shall ensure that the bodies notified by them
participate in the work of that group, directly or by means of
designated representatives.

CHAPTER 5
UNION MARKET SURVEILLANCE AND CONTROL OF
APPARATUS ENTERING THE UNION MARKET AND UNION
SAFEGUARD PROCEDURE

Article 37
Union market surveillance and control of apparatus
entering the Union market

Information obligation on notified bodies

Article 15(3) and Articles 16 to 29 of Regulation (EC)
No 765/2008 shall apply to apparatus.

1.
Notified bodies shall inform the notifying authority of the
following:

Article 38

(a) any refusal, restriction, suspension or withdrawal of a
certificate;
(b) any circumstances affecting the scope of or conditions for
notification;
(c) any request for information which they have received from
market surveillance authorities regarding conformity
assessment activities;
(d) on request, conformity assessment activities performed
within the scope of their notification and any other
activity performed, including cross-border activities and
subcontracting.
2.
Notified bodies shall provide the other bodies notified
under this Directive carrying out similar conformity assessment

Procedure for dealing with apparatus presenting a risk at
national level
1.
Where the market surveillance authorities of one Member
State have sufficient reason to believe that an apparatus covered
by this Directive presents a risk to aspects of public interest
protection covered by this Directive, they shall carry out an
evaluation in relation to the apparatus concerned covering all
relevant requirements laid down in this Directive. The relevant
economic operators shall cooperate as necessary with the
market surveillance authorities for that purpose.
Where, in the course of the evaluation referred to in the first
subparagraph, the market surveillance authorities find that the
apparatus does not comply with the requirements laid down in
this Directive, they shall without delay require the relevant
economic operator to take all appropriate corrective actions
to bring the apparatus into compliance with those requirements,
to withdraw the apparatus from the market, or to recall it
within a reasonable period, commensurate with the nature of
the risk, as they may prescribe.

L 96/94

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

The market surveillance authorities shall inform the relevant
notified body accordingly.
Article 21 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply to the
measures referred to in the second subparagraph of this para­
graph.
2.
Where the market surveillance authorities consider that
non-compliance is not restricted to their national territory,
they shall inform the Commission and the other Member
States of the results of the evaluation, and of the actions
which they have required the economic operator to take.
3.
The economic operator shall ensure that all appropriate
corrective action is taken in respect of all the apparatus
concerned that it has made available on the market throughout
the Union.
4.
Where the relevant economic operator does not take
adequate corrective action within the period referred to in the
second subparagraph of paragraph 1, the market surveillance
authorities shall take all appropriate provisional measures to
prohibit or restrict the apparatus’s being made available on
their national market, to withdraw the apparatus from that
market or to recall it.
The market surveillance authorities shall inform the
Commission and the other Member States, without delay, of
those measures.
5.
The information referred to in the second subparagraph of
paragraph 4 shall include all available details, in particular the
data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant
apparatus, the origin of the apparatus, the nature of the noncompliance alleged and the risk involved, the nature and
duration of the national measures taken and the arguments
put forward by the relevant economic operator. In particular,
the market surveillance authorities shall indicate whether the
non-compliance is due to either of the following:
(a) failure of the apparatus to meet the requirements relating to
aspects of public interest protection covered by this
Directive; or
(b) shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in
Article 13 conferring a presumption of conformity.
6.
Member States other than the Member State initiating the
procedure under this Article shall without delay inform the
Commission and the other Member States of any measures
adopted and of any additional information at their disposal
relating to the non-compliance of the apparatus concerned,
and, in the event of disagreement with the adopted national
measure, of their objections.
7.
Where, within three months of receipt of the information
referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4, no

29.3.2014

objection has been raised by either a Member State or the
Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a
Member State, that measure shall be deemed justified.
8.
Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive
measures, such as withdrawal of the apparatus from the
market, are taken in respect of the apparatus concerned
without delay.
Article 39
Union safeguard procedure
1.
Where, on completion of the procedure set out in
Article 38(3) and (4), objections are raised against a measure
taken by a Member State, or where the Commission considers a
national measure to be contrary to Union legislation, the
Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with
the Member States and the relevant economic operator or
operators and shall evaluate the national measure. On the
basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall
adopt an implementing act determining whether the national
measure is justified or not.
The Commission shall address its decision to all Member States
and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant
economic operator or operators.
2.
If the national measure is considered justified, all Member
States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the noncompliant apparatus is withdrawn from their market, and shall
inform the Commission accordingly. If the national measure is
considered unjustified, the Member State concerned shall
withdraw that measure.
3.
Where the national measure is considered justified and the
non-compliance of the apparatus is attributed to shortcomings
in the harmonised standards referred to in point (b) of
Article 38(5) of this Directive, the Commission shall apply
the procedure provided for in Article 11 of Regulation (EU)
No 1025/2012.
Article 40
Formal non-compliance
1.
Without prejudice to Article 38, where a Member State
makes one of the following findings, it shall require the relevant
economic operator to put an end to the non-compliance
concerned:
(a) the CE marking has been affixed in violation of Article 30
of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 or of Article 17 of this
Directive;
(b) the CE marking has not been affixed;
(c) the EU declaration of conformity has not been drawn up;

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(d) the EU declaration of conformity has not been drawn up
correctly;
(e) technical documentation is either not available or not
complete;
(f) the information referred to in Article 7(6) or Article 9(3) is
absent, false or incomplete;

L 96/95

Article 43
Transitional provisions
Member States shall not impede the making available on the
market and/or the putting into service of equipment covered by
Directive 2004/108/EC which is in conformity with that
Directive and which was placed on the market before
20 April 2016.

Article 44
(g) any other administrative requirement provided for in
Article 7 or Article 9 is not fulfilled.
2.
Where the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1
persists, the Member State concerned shall take all appropriate
measures to restrict or prohibit the apparatus being made
available on the market or ensure that it is recalled or
withdrawn from the market.

CHAPTER 6

Transposition
1.
Member States shall adopt and publish, by 19 April 2016,
the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to
comply with Article 2(2), points (9) to (25) of Article 3(1),
Article 4, Article 5(1), Articles 7 to 12, Articles 15, 16 and
17, the first subparagraph of Article 19(1), Articles 20 to 43,
and Annexes II, III and IV. They shall forthwith communicate
the text of those measures to the Commission.

They shall apply those measures from 20 April 2016.

COMMITTEE, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 41
Committee procedure
1.
The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee on
Electromagnetic Compatibility. That committee shall be a
committee within the meaning of Regulation (EU)
No 182/2011.
2.
Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 4 of
Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.
3.
The committee shall be consulted by the Commission on
any matter for which consultation of sectoral experts is required
by Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 or by any other Union legis­
lation.

When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a
reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a
reference on the occasion of their official publication. They
shall also include a statement that references in existing laws,
regulations and administrative provisions to the Directive
repealed by this Directive shall be construed as references to
this Directive. Member States shall determine how such
reference is to be made and how that statement is to be formu­
lated.

2.
Member States shall communicate to the Commission the
texts of the main provisions of national law which they adopt
in the field covered by this Directive.

Article 45
Repeal

The committee may furthermore examine any other matter
concerning the application of this Directive raised either by its
chair or by a representative of a Member State in accordance
with its rules of procedure.
Article 42
Penalties
Member States shall lay down rules on penalties applicable to
infringements by economic operators of the provisions of
national law adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take
all measures necessary to ensure that they are enforced. Such
rules may include criminal penalties for serious infringements.
The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and
dissuasive.

Directive 2004/108/EC is repealed with effect from 20 April
2016, without prejudice to the obligations of the Member States
relating to the time-limit for transposition into national law and
the dates of application of the Directive set out in Annex V.

References to the repealed Directive shall be construed as
references to this Directive and shall be read in accordance
with the correlation table in Annex VI.

Article 46
Entry into force and application
This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day
following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the
European Union.

L 96/96

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 1, Article 2, points (1) to (8) of Article 3(1), Article 3(2), Article 5(2) and (3), Article 6, Article 13,
Article 19(3) and Annex I shall apply from 20 April 2016.
Article 47
Addressees
This Directive is addressed to the Member States.

Done at Strasbourg, 26 February 2014.

For the European Parliament
The President

For the Council
The President

M. SCHULZ

D. KOURKOULAS

29.3.2014

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX I
ESSENTIAL REQUIREMENTS
1. General requirements
Equipment shall be so designed and manufactured, having regard to the state of the art, as to ensure that:
(a) the electromagnetic disturbance generated does not exceed the level above which radio and telecommunications
equipment or other equipment cannot operate as intended;
(b) it has a level of immunity to the electromagnetic disturbance to be expected in its intended use which allows it to
operate without unacceptable degradation of its intended use.
2. Specific requirements for fixed installations
Installation and intended use of components
A fixed installation shall be installed applying good engineering practices and respecting the information on the
intended use of its components, with a view to meeting the essential requirements set out in point 1.

L 96/97

EN

L 96/98

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX II
MODULE A: INTERNAL PRODUCTION CONTROL
1.

Internal production control is the conformity assessment procedure whereby the manufacturer fulfils the obligations
laid down in points 2, 3, 4 and 5 of this Annex, and ensures and declares on his sole responsibility that the
apparatus concerned satisfy the requirements of this Directive that apply to it.

2.

Electromagnetic compatibility assessment
The manufacturer shall perform an electromagnetic compatibility assessment of the apparatus, on the basis of the
relevant phenomena, with a view to meeting the essential requirements set out in point 1 of Annex I.
The electromagnetic compatibility assessment shall take into account all normal intended operating conditions.
Where the apparatus is capable of taking different configurations, the electromagnetic compatibility assessment
shall confirm whether the apparatus meets the essential requirements set out in point 1 of Annex I in all the
possible configurations identified by the manufacturer as representative of its intended use.

3.

Technical documentation
The manufacturer shall establish the technical documentation. The documentation shall make it possible to assess the
apparatus conformity to the relevant requirements, and shall include an adequate analysis and assessment of the
risk(s).
The technical documentation shall specify the applicable requirements and cover, as far as relevant for the
assessment, the design, manufacture and operation of the apparatus. The technical documentation shall, wherever
applicable, contain at least the following elements:
(a) a general description of the apparatus;
(b) conceptual design and manufacturing drawings and schemes of components, sub-assemblies, circuits, etc.;
(c) descriptions and explanations necessary for the understanding of those drawings and schemes and the operation
of the apparatus;
(d) a list of the harmonised standards applied in full or in part the references of which have been published in the
Official Journal of the European Union and, where those harmonised standards have not been applied, descriptions
of the solutions adopted to meet the essential requirements of this Directive, including a list of other relevant
technical specifications applied. In the event of partly applied harmonised standards, the technical documentation
shall specify the parts which have been applied;
(e) results of design calculations made, examinations carried out, etc.;
(f) test reports.

4.

Manufacturing
The manufacturer shall take all measures necessary so that the manufacturing process and its monitoring ensure
compliance of the manufactured apparatus with the technical documentation referred to in point 3 of this Annex
and with the essential requirements set out in point 1 of Annex I.

5.

CE marking and EU declaration of conformity

5.1. The manufacturer shall affix the CE marking to each individual apparatus that satisfies the applicable requirements of
this Directive.
5.2. The manufacturer shall draw up a written EU declaration of conformity for an apparatus model and keep it together
with the technical documentation at the disposal of the national authorities for 10 years after the apparatus has been
placed on the market. The EU declaration of conformity shall identify the apparatus for which it has been drawn up.
A copy of the EU declaration of conformity shall be made available to the relevant authorities upon request.

29.3.2014

EN

29.3.2014

6.

Official Journal of the European Union

Authorised representative
The manufacturer’s obligations set out in point 5 may be fulfilled by his authorised representative, on his behalf and
under his responsibility, provided that they are specified in the mandate.

L 96/99

EN

L 96/100

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX III
PART A
Module B: EU-type examination
1.

EU-type examination is the part of a conformity assessment procedure in which a notified body examines the
technical design of an apparatus and verifies and attests that the technical design of the apparatus meets the essential
requirements set out in point 1 of Annex I.

2.

EU-type examination shall be carried out by assessment of the adequacy of the technical design of the apparatus
through examination of the technical documentation referred to in point 3, without examination of a specimen
(design type). It may be restricted to some aspects of the essential requirements as specified by the manufacturer or
his authorised representative.

3.

The manufacturer shall lodge an application for EU-type examination with a single notified body of his choice.
The application shall specify the aspects of the essential requirements for which examination is requested and shall
include:
(a) the name and address of the manufacturer and, if the application is lodged by the authorised representative, his
name and address as well;
(b) a written declaration that the same application has not been lodged with any other notified body;
(c) the technical documentation. The technical documentation shall make it possible to assess the apparatus
conformity with the applicable requirements of this Directive and shall include an adequate analysis and
assessment of the risk(s). The technical documentation shall specify the applicable requirements and cover, as
far as relevant for the assessment, the design, manufacture and operation of the apparatus. The technical
documentation shall contain, wherever applicable, at least the following elements:
(i) a general description of the apparatus;
(ii) conceptual design and manufacturing drawings and schemes of components, sub-assemblies, circuits, etc.;
(iii) descriptions and explanations necessary for the understanding of those drawings and schemes and the
operation of the apparatus;
(iv) a list of the harmonised standards applied in full or in part the references of which have been published in
the Official Journal of the European Union, and, where those harmonised standards have not been applied,
descriptions of the solutions adopted to meet the essential requirements of this Directive, including a list of
other relevant technical specifications applied. In the event of partly applied harmonised standards, the
technical documentation shall specify the parts which have been applied;
(v) results of design calculations made, examinations carried out, etc.;
(vi) test reports.

4.

The notified body shall examine the technical documentation to assess the adequacy of the technical design of the
apparatus in relation to the aspects of the essential requirements for which examination is requested.

5.

The notified body shall draw up an evaluation report that records the activities undertaken in accordance with point
4 and their outcomes. Without prejudice to its obligations vis-à-vis the notifying authorities, the notified body shall
release the content of that report, in full or in part, only with the agreement of the manufacturer.

6.

Where the type meets the requirements of this Directive that apply to the apparatus concerned, the notified body
shall issue an EU-type examination certificate to the manufacturer. That certificate shall contain the name and
address of the manufacturer, the conclusions of the examination, the aspects of the essential requirements
covered by the examination, the conditions (if any) for its validity and the necessary data for identification of the
approved type. The EU-type examination certificate may have one or more annexes attached.
The EU-type examination certificate and its annexes shall contain all relevant information to allow the conformity of
manufactured apparatus with the examined type to be evaluated and to allow for in-service control.

29.3.2014

EN

29.3.2014

Official Journal of the European Union

Where the type does not satisfy the applicable requirements of this Directive, the notified body shall refuse to issue
an EU-type examination certificate and shall inform the applicant accordingly, giving detailed reasons for its refusal.
7.

The notified body shall keep itself apprised of any changes in the generally acknowledged state of the art which
indicate that the approved type may no longer comply with the applicable requirements of this Directive, and shall
determine whether such changes require further investigation. If so, the notified body shall inform the manufacturer
accordingly.
The manufacturer shall inform the notified body that holds the technical documentation relating to the EU-type
examination certificate of all modifications to the approved type that may affect the conformity of the apparatus
with the essential requirements of this Directive or the conditions for validity of that certificate. Such modifications
shall require additional approval in the form of an addition to the original EU-type examination certificate.

8.

Each notified body shall inform its notifying authority concerning the EU-type examination certificates and/or any
additions thereto which it has issued or withdrawn, and shall, periodically or upon request, make available to its
notifying authority the list of such certificates and/or any additions thereto refused, suspended or otherwise
restricted.
Each notified body shall inform the other notified bodies concerning the EU-type examination certificates and/or any
additions thereto which it has refused, withdrawn, suspended or otherwise restricted, and, upon request, concerning
such certificates and/or additions thereto which it has issued.
The Commission, the Member States and the other notified bodies may, on request, obtain a copy of the EU-type
examination certificates and/or additions thereto. On request, the Commission and the Member States may obtain a
copy of the technical documentation and the results of the examinations carried out by the notified body. The
notified body shall keep a copy of the EU-type examination certificate, its annexes and additions, as well as the
technical file including the documentation submitted by the manufacturer, until the expiry of the validity of that
certificate.

9.

The manufacturer shall keep a copy of the EU-type examination certificate, its annexes and additions together with
the technical documentation at the disposal of the national authorities for 10 years after the apparatus has been
placed on the market.

10. The manufacturer’s authorised representative may lodge the application referred to in point 3 and fulfil the
obligations set out in points 7 and 9, provided that they are specified in the mandate.
PART B
Module C: conformity to type based on internal production control
1.

Conformity to type based on internal production control is the part of a conformity assessment procedure whereby
the manufacturer fulfils the obligations laid down in points 2 and 3, and ensures and declares that the apparatus
concerned are in conformity with the type described in the EU-type examination certificate and satisfy the
requirements of this Directive that apply to them.

2.

Manufacturing
The manufacturer shall take all measures necessary so that the manufacturing process and its monitoring ensure
conformity of the manufactured apparatus with the approved type described in the EU-type examination certificate
and with the requirements of this Directive that apply to them.

3.

CE marking and EU declaration of conformity

3.1. The manufacturer shall affix the CE marking to each individual apparatus that is in conformity with the type
described in the EU-type examination certificate and satisfies the applicable requirements of this Directive.
3.2. The manufacturer shall draw up a written EU declaration of conformity for each apparatus model and keep it at the
disposal of the national authorities for 10 years after the apparatus has been placed on the market. The EU
declaration of conformity shall identify the apparatus model for which it has been drawn up.
A copy of the EU declaration of conformity shall be made available to the relevant authorities upon request.
4.

Authorised representative
The manufacturer’s obligations set out in point 3 may be fulfilled by his authorised representative, on his behalf and
under his responsibility, provided that they are specified in the mandate.

L 96/101

L 96/102

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX IV
EU declaration of conformity (No Xxxx) (1)
1. Apparatus model/Product (product, type, batch or serial number):
2. Name and address of the manufacturer or his authorised representative:
3. This declaration of conformity is issued under the sole responsibility of the manufacturer.
4. Object of the declaration (identification of apparatus allowing traceability; it may include a colour image of sufficient
clarity where necessary for the identification of the apparatus):
5. The object of the declaration described above is in conformity with the relevant Union harmonisation legislation:
6. References to the relevant harmonised standards used, including the date of the standard, or references to the other
technical specifications, including the date of the specification, in relation to which conformity is declared:
7. Where applicable, the notified body … (name, number) performed … (description of intervention) and issued the
certificate:
8. Additional information:
Signed for and on behalf of:
(place and date of issue):
(name, function) (signature):

(1) It is optional for the manufacturer to assign a number to the declaration of conformity.

29.3.2014

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

L 96/103

ANNEX V
Time-limit for transposition into national law and date of application
(referred to in Article 45)
Directive

2004/108/EC

Time-limit for transposition

20 January 2007

Date of application

20 July 2007

EN

L 96/104

Official Journal of the European Union

29.3.2014

ANNEX VI
Correlation table
Directive 2004/108/EC

This Directive

Article 1(1)

Article 1 and Article 2(1)

Article 1(2)

Article 2(2)(a) to (c)

Article 1(3)

Article 2(2)(d)

Article 1(4)

Article 2(3)

Article 1(5)

Article 2(4)

Article 2(1)(a)

Article 3(1)(1)

Article 2(1)(b)

Article 3(1)(2)

Article 2(1)(c)

Article 3(1)(3)

Article 2(1)(d)

Article 3(1)(4)

Article 2(1)(e)

Article 3(1)(5)

Article 2(1)(f)

Article 3(1)(6)

Article 2(1)(g)

Article 3(1)(7)

Article 2(1)(h)

Article 3(1)(8)

Article 2(2)

Article 3(2)

Article 3

Article 4

Article 4

Article 5

Article 5

Article 6

Article 6

Article 13

Article 7

Article 14

Article 8

Articles 16 and 17

Article 9(1)

Article 7(5)

Article 9(2)

Article 7(6)

Article 9(3)

Article 18(1)

Article 9(4)

Article 18(2)

Article 9(5)

Article 18(3)

Articles 10 and 11

Articles 37, 38 and 39

Article 12

Chapter 4

Article 13

Article 19

Article 14

Article 45

Article 15

Article 43

Article 16

Article 44

Article 17

Article 46

Article 18

Article 47

Annex I

Annex I

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Directive 2004/108/EC

L 96/105

This Directive

Annex II and point 1 of Annex IV

Annex II

Annex III

Annex III

Point 2 of Annex IV

Annex IV

Annex V

Articles 16 and 17

Annex VI

Article 24

Annex VII

Annex VI

L 96/106

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

STATEMENT OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
The European Parliament considers that only when and in so far as implementing acts in the sense of
Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 are discussed in meetings of committees, can the latter be considered as
‘comitology committees’ within the meaning of Annex I to the Framework Agreement on the relations
between the European Parliament and the European Commission. Meetings of committees thus fall within
the scope of point 15 of the Framework Agreement when and insofar as other issues are discussed.

29.3.2014

