29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

L 96/357

DIRECTIVE 2014/35/EU OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
of 26 February 2014
on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to the making available on the
market of electrical equipment designed for use within certain voltage limits
(recast)
(Text with EEA relevance)

framework for the marketing of products (5) lays down
common principles and reference provisions intended to
apply across sectoral legislation in order to provide a
coherent basis for revision or recasts of that legislation.
Directive 2006/95/EC should therefore be adapted to
that Decision.

THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE
EUROPEAN UNION,

Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union, and in particular Article 114 thereof,
Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

(4)

This Directive covers electrical equipment designed for
use within certain voltage limits which is new to the
Union market when it is placed on the market; that is
to say it is either new electrical equipment made by a
manufacturer established in the Union or electrical
equipment, whether new or second-hand, imported
from a third country.

(5)

This Directive should apply to all forms of supply,
including distance selling.

(6)

Economic operators should be responsible for the
compliance of electrical equipment with this Directive,
in relation to their respective roles in the supply chain,
so as to ensure a high level of protection of public
interests, such as health and safety of persons, of
domestic animals and property, and to guarantee fair
competition on the Union market.

(7)

All economic operators intervening in the supply and
distribution chain should take appropriate measures to
ensure that they only make available on the market elec­
trical equipment which is in conformity with this
Directive. It is necessary to provide for a clear and
proportionate distribution of obligations which
correspond to the role of each economic operator in
the supply and distribution chain.

(8)

In order to facilitate communication between economic
operators, market surveillance authorities and consumers,
Member States should encourage economic operators to
include a website address in addition to the postal
address.

(9)

The manufacturer, having detailed knowledge of the
design and production process, is best placed to carry
out the conformity assessment procedure. Conformity
assessment should therefore remain solely the obligation
of the manufacturer. There is no conformity assessment
procedure in this Directive which requires the inter­
vention of a notified body.

After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national
parliaments,
Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and
Social Committee (1),
Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure (2),
Whereas:
(1)

(2)

(3)

A number of amendments are to be made to Directive
2006/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 12 December 2006 on the harmonisation
of the laws of Member States relating to electrical
equipment designed for use within certain voltage
limits (3). In the interests of clarity, that Directive
should be recast.
Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008 setting
out the requirements for accreditation and market
surveillance relating to the marketing of products (4)
lays down rules on the accreditation of conformity
assessment bodies, provides a framework for the
market surveillance of products and for controls on
products from third countries, and lays down the
general principles of the CE marking.
Decision No 768/2008/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 9 July 2008 on a common

(1) OJ C 181, 21.6.2012, p. 105.
(2) Position of the European Parliament of of 5 February 2014 (not yet
published in the Official Journal) and decision of the Council of
20 February 2014.
(3) OJ L 374, 27.12.2006, p. 10. Directive 2006/95/EC is the codifi­
cation of Council Directive 73/23/EEC of 19 February 1973 on the
harmonization of the laws of Member States relating to electrical
equipment designed for use within certain voltage limits (OJ L 77,
26.3.1973, p. 29).
(4) OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 30.

(5) OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 82.

L 96/358

(10)

(11)

(12)

(13)

(14)

(15)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

It is necessary to ensure that electrical equipment from
third countries entering the Union market comply with
this Directive, and in particular that appropriate
conformity assessment procedures have been carried
out by manufacturers with regard to that electrical
equipment. Provision should therefore be made for
importers to make sure that electrical equipment they
place on the market comply with the requirements of
this Directive and that they do not place on the
market electrical equipment which does not comply
with such requirements or present a risk. Provision
should also be made for importers to make sure that
conformity assessment procedures have been carried
out and that marking of electrical equipment and docu­
mentation drawn up by manufacturers are available for
inspection by the competent national authorities.

When placing electrical equipment on the market, every
importer should indicate on the electrical equipment his
name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and
the postal address at which he can be contacted.
Exceptions should be provided for in cases where the
size or nature of the electrical equipment does not
allow it. This includes cases where the importer would
have to open the packaging to put his name and address
on the electrical equipment.

The distributor makes electrical equipment available on
the market after it has been placed on the market by the
manufacturer or the importer and should act with due
care to ensure that its handling of electrical equipment
does not adversely affect the compliance of the electrical
equipment.

Any economic operator that either places electrical
equipment on the market under his own name or
trade mark or modifies electrical equipment in such a
way that compliance with this Directive may be
affected should be considered to be the manufacturer
and should assume the obligations of the manufacturer.

to update such information in respect of other economic
operators who have either supplied them with electrical
equipment or to whom they have supplied electrical
equipment.

(16)

This Directive should be limited to the expression of the
safety objectives. In order to facilitate conformity
assessment with those objectives it is necessary to
provide for a presumption of conformity for electrical
equipment which is in conformity with harmonised
standards that are adopted in accordance with Regulation
(EU) No 1025/2012 of the European Parliament and of
the Council of 25 October 2012 on European Standard­
isation (1) for the purpose of expressing detailed technical
specifications of those objectives.

(17)

Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 provides for a procedure
for objections to harmonised standards where those
standards do not entirely satisfy the safety objectives
set out in this Directive.

(18)

The harmonised standards relevant to this Directive
should also take into account the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (2).

(19)

The free movement of electrical equipment for which
harmonised standards do not exist should be achieved
by applying the safety provisions of the international
standards laid down by the International Electrotechnical
Commission or by applying national standards.

(20)

In order to enable economic operators to demonstrate
and the competent authorities to ensure that electrical
equipment made available on the market is in conformity
with the safety objectives it is necessary to provide for
conformity assessment procedures. Decision No 768/
2008/EC establishes modules for conformity assessment
procedures, which include procedures from the least to
the most stringent, in proportion to the level of risk
involved and the level of safety required. In order to
ensure inter-sectoral coherence and to avoid ad-hoc
variants, conformity assessment procedures should be
chosen from among those modules.

(21)

Manufacturers should draw up an EU declaration of
conformity to provide information required under this
Directive on the conformity of electrical equipment
with this Directive and of other relevant Union harmon­
isation legislation.

Distributors and importers, being close to the market
place, should be involved in market surveillance tasks
carried out by the competent national authorities, and
should be prepared to participate actively, providing
those authorities with all necessary information relating
to the electrical equipment concerned.

Ensuring traceability of electrical equipment throughout
the whole supply chain helps to make market
surveillance simpler and more efficient. An efficient
traceability system facilitates market surveillance auth­
orities’ task of tracing economic operators who made
non-compliant electrical equipment available on the
market. When keeping the information required under
this Directive for the identification of other economic
operators, economic operators should not be required

29.3.2014

(1) OJ L 316, 14.11.2012, p. 12.
(2) Approved by Council Decision 2010/48/EC of 26 November 2009
concerning the conclusion, by the European Community, of the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (OJ L 23, 27.1.2010, p. 35).

29.3.2014

(22)

(23)

(24)

(25)

(26)

(27)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

To ensure effective access to information for market
surveillance purposes, the information required to
identify all applicable Union acts should be available in
a single EU declaration of conformity. In order to reduce
the administrative burden on economic operators, that
single EU declaration of conformity may be a dossier
made up of relevant individual declarations of
conformity.

(28)

Where the Member States and the Commission agree as
to the justification of a measure taken by a Member
State, no further involvement of the Commission
should be required, except where non-compliance can
be attributed to shortcomings of a harmonised standard.

(29)

In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implemen­
tation of this Directive, implementing powers should be
conferred on the Commission. Those powers should be
exercised in accordance with Regulation (EU)
No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 16 February 2011 laying down the rules
and general principles concerning mechanisms for
control by Member States of the Commission’s exercise
of implementing powers (1).

(30)

The examination procedure should be used for the
adoption of implementing acts with respect to
compliant electrical equipment which presents a risk to
the health or safety of persons or to other aspects of
public interest protection.

(31)

The Commission should adopt immediately applicable
implementing acts where, in duly justified cases relating
to compliant electrical equipment which presents a risk
to the health or safety of persons, or to domestic animals
or to property, imperative grounds of urgency so require.

(32)

In line with established practice, the committee set up by
this Directive can play a useful role in examining matters
concerning the application of this Directive raised either
by its chair or by a representative of a Member State in
accordance with its rules of procedure.

(33)

When matters relating to this Directive, other than its
implementation or infringements, are being examined,
i.e. in a Commission expert group, the European
Parliament should in line with existing practice receive
full information and documentation and, where appro­
priate, an invitation to attend such meetings.

(34)

The Commission should, by means of implementing acts
and, given their special nature, acting without the appli­
cation of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, determine
whether measures taken by Member States in respect of
non-compliant electrical equipment are justified or not.

(35)

Member States should lay down rules on penalties
applicable to infringements of provisions of national
law adopted pursuant to this Directive and ensure that
those rules are enforced. The penalties provided for
should be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.

The CE marking, indicating the conformity of electrical
equipment, is the visible consequence of a whole process
comprising conformity assessment in a broad sense.
General principles governing the CE marking are set
out in Regulation (EC) No 765/2008. Rules governing
the affixing of the CE marking should be laid down in
this Directive.

In order to ensure legal certainty, it is necessary to clarify
that rules on Union market surveillance and control of
products entering the Union market provided for in
Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 apply to electrical
equipment. This Directive should not prevent Member
States from choosing the competent authorities to carry
out those tasks.

Member States should take all appropriate measures to
ensure that electrical equipment may be placed on the
market only if, when properly stored and used for its
intended purpose, or under conditions of use which
can be reasonably foreseen, it does not endanger the
health and safety of persons. Electrical equipment
should be considered as non-compliant with the safety
objectives laid down in this Directive only under
conditions of use which can be reasonably foreseen,
that is when such use could result from lawful and
readily predictable human behaviour.

Directive 2006/95/EC already provides for a safeguard
procedure which applies only in the event of
disagreement between Member States over measures
taken by a Member State. In order to increase trans­
parency and to reduce processing time, it is necessary
to improve the existing safeguard procedure, with a
view to making it more efficient and drawing on the
expertise available in Member States.

The existing system should be supplemented by a
procedure under which interested parties are informed
of measures intended to be taken with regard to electrical
equipment presenting a risk to the health or safety of
persons or domestic animals, or to property. It should
also allow market surveillance authorities, in cooperation
with the relevant economic operators, to act at an earlier
stage in respect of such electrical equipment.

L 96/359

(1) OJ L 55, 28.2.2011, p. 13.

L 96/360

(36)

(37)

(38)

(39)

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

It is necessary to provide for reasonable transitional
arrangements that allow the making available on the
market, without the need to comply with further
product requirements, of electrical equipment which has
already been placed on the market in accordance with
Directive 2006/95/EC before the date of application of
national measures transposing this Directive. Distributors
should therefore be able to supply electrical equipment
that has been placed on the market, namely stock that is
already in the distribution chain, before the date of appli­
cation of national measures transposing this Directive.

Since the objective of this Directive, namely to ensure
that electrical equipment on the market fulfils the safety
objectives providing for a high level of protection of
health and safety of persons, and of domestic animals
and property, while guaranteeing the functioning of the
internal, market cannot be sufficiently achieved by the
Member States but can rather, by reason of its scale
and effects, be better achieved at Union level, the
Union may adopt measures, in accordance with the
principle of subsidiarity as set out in Article 5 of the
Treaty on European Union. In accordance with the
principle of proportionality, as set out in that Article,
this Directive does not go beyond what is necessary in
order to achieve that objective.

The obligation to transpose this Directive into national
law should be confined to those provisions which
represent a substantive amendment as compared to the
earlier Directive. The obligation to transpose the
provisions which are unchanged arises under the earlier
Directive.

This Directive should be without prejudice to the
obligations of the Member States relating to the timelimits for transposition into national law and the dates
of application of the Directives set out in Annex V,

29.3.2014

Article 2
Definitions
For the purposes of this Directive, the following definitions shall
apply:
(1) ‘making available on the market’ means any supply of
electrical equipment for distribution, consumption or use
on the Union market in the course of a commercial
activity, whether in return for payment or free of charge;
(2) ‘placing on the market’ means the first making available of
electrical equipment on the Union market;
(3) ‘manufacturer’ means any natural or legal person who
manufactures electrical equipment or has electrical
equipment designed or manufactured, and markets that
equipment under his name or trade mark;

(4) ‘authorised representative’ means any natural or legal
person established within the Union who has received a
written mandate from a manufacturer to act on his behalf
in relation to specified tasks;
(5) ‘importer’ means any natural or legal person established
within the Union who places electrical equipment from a
third country on the Union market;
(6) ‘distributor’ means any natural or legal person in the
supply chain, other than the manufacturer or the
importer, who makes electrical equipment available on
the market;
(7) ‘economic operators’ means the manufacturer, the auth­
orised representative, the importer and the distributor;

HAVE ADOPTED THIS DIRECTIVE:

CHAPTER 1

(8) ‘technical specification’ means a document that prescribes
technical requirements to be fulfilled by an electrical
equipment;

GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 1
Subject matter and scope
The purpose of this Directive is to ensure that electrical
equipment on the market fulfils the requirements providing
for a high level of protection of health and safety of persons,
and of domestic animals and property, while guaranteeing the
functioning of the internal market.

This Directive shall apply to electrical equipment designed for
use with a voltage rating of between 50 and 1 000 V for alter­
nating current and between 75 and 1 500 V for direct current,
other than the equipment and phenomena listed in Annex II.

(9) ‘harmonised standard’ means harmonised standard as
defined in point (c) of point 1 of Article 2 of Regulation
(EU) No 1025/2012;
(10) ‘conformity assessment’ means the process demonstrating
whether the safety objectives referred to in Article 3 and
set out in Annex I relating to electrical equipment have
been fulfilled;
(11) ‘recall’ means any measure aimed at achieving the return of
electrical equipment that has already been made available
to the end-user;

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

(12) ‘withdrawal’ means any measure aimed at preventing elec­
trical equipment in the supply chain from being made
available on the market;

(13) ‘Union harmonisation legislation’ means any Union legis­
lation harmonising the conditions for the marketing of
products;

(14) ‘CE marking’ means a marking by which the manufacturer
indicates that the electrical equipment is in conformity
with the applicable requirements set out in Union harmon­
isation legislation providing for its affixing.

L 96/361

2.
Manufacturers shall draw up the technical documentation
referred to in Annex III and carry out the conformity
assessment procedure referred to in Annex III or have it
carried out.

Where compliance of electrical equipment with the safety
objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I has
been demonstrated by the conformity assessment procedure
referred to in the first subparagraph, manufacturers shall draw
up an EU declaration of conformity and affix the CE marking.

3.
Manufacturers shall keep the technical documentation
referred to in Annex III and the EU declaration of conformity
for 10 years after the electrical equipment has been placed on
the market.

Article 3
Making available on the market and safety objectives
Electrical equipment may be made available on the Union
market only if, having been constructed in accordance with
good engineering practice in safety matters in force in the
Union, it does not endanger the health and safety of persons
and domestic animals, or property, when properly installed and
maintained and used in applications for which it was made.

The principal elements of the safety objectives are listed in
Annex I.

Article 4
Free movement
The Member States shall not impede, for the aspects covered by
this Directive, the making available on the market of electrical
equipment which complies with this Directive.

Article 5
Supply of electricity
In relation to electrical equipment, the Member States shall
ensure that stricter safety requirements than the safety objectives
referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I are not imposed
by electricity supply bodies for connection to the grid, or for
the supply of electricity to users of electrical equipment.

CHAPTER 2
OBLIGATIONS OF ECONOMIC OPERATORS

4.
Manufacturers shall ensure that procedures are in place for
series production to remain in conformity with this Directive.
Changes in product design or characteristics and changes in the
harmonised standards referred to in Article 12, the international
or national standards referred to in Articles 13 and 14, or in
other technical specifications by reference to which conformity
of electrical equipment is declared shall be adequately taken into
account.

When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks presented by
electrical equipment, manufacturers shall, to protect the health
and safety of consumers, carry out sample testing of electrical
equipment made available on the market, investigate, and, if
necessary, keep a register of complaints, of non-conforming
electrical equipment and electrical equipment recalls, and shall
keep distributors informed of any such monitoring.

5.
Manufacturers shall ensure that electrical equipment which
they have placed on the market bears a type, batch or serial
number or other element allowing its identification, or, where
the size or nature of the electrical equipment does not allow it,
that the required information is provided on its packaging or in
a document accompanying the electrical equipment.

6.
Manufacturers shall indicate on the electrical equipment
their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark
and the postal address at which they can be contacted or,
where that is not possible, on its packaging or in a document
accompanying the electrical equipment. The address shall
indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be
contacted. The contact details shall be in a language easily
understood by end-users and market surveillance authorities.

Article 6
Obligations of manufacturers
1.
When placing their electrical equipment on the market,
manufacturers shall ensure that it has been designed and manu­
factured in accordance with the safety objectives referred to in
Article 3 and set out in Annex I.

7.
Manufacturers shall ensure that the electrical equipment is
accompanied by instructions and safety information in a
language which can be easily understood by consumers and
other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.
Such instructions and safety information, as well as any
labelling, shall be clear, understandable and intelligible.

L 96/362

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

8.
Manufacturers who consider or have reason to believe that
electrical equipment which they have placed on the market is
not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the
corrective measures necessary to bring that electrical equipment
into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate.
Furthermore, where the electrical equipment presents a risk,
manufacturers shall immediately inform the competent
national authorities of the Member States in which they made
the electrical equipment available on the market to that effect,
giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any
corrective measures taken.
9.
Manufacturers shall, further to a reasoned request from a
competent national authority, provide it with all the
information and documentation in paper or electronic form
necessary to demonstrate the conformity of the electrical
equipment with this Directive, in a language which can be
easily understood by that authority. They shall cooperate with
that authority, at its request, on any action taken to eliminate
the risks posed by electrical equipment which they have placed
on the market.
Article 7
Authorised representatives
1.
A manufacturer may, by a written mandate, appoint an
authorised representative.
The obligations laid down in Article 6(1) and the obligation to
draw up technical documentation referred to in Article 6(2)
shall not form part of the authorised representative’s mandate.
2.
An authorised representative shall perform the tasks
specified in the mandate received from the manufacturer. The
mandate shall allow the authorised representative to do at least
the following:
(a) keep the EU declaration of conformity and the technical
documentation at the disposal of national market
surveillance authorities for 10 years after the electrical
equipment has been placed on the market;
(b) further to a reasoned request from a competent national
authority, provide that authority with all the information
and documentation necessary to demonstrate the
conformity of electrical equipment;
(c) cooperate with the competent national authorities, at their
request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by
electrical equipment covered by the authorised represen­
tative’s mandate.
Article 8
Obligations of importers
1.
Importers shall place only compliant electrical equipment
on the market.

29.3.2014

2.
Before placing electrical equipment on the market
importers shall ensure that the appropriate conformity
assessment procedure has been carried out by the manufacturer.
They shall ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the
technical documentation, that the electrical equipment bears
the CE marking and is accompanied by the required documents,
and that the manufacturer has complied with the requirements
set out in Article 6(5) and (6).

Where an importer considers or has reason to believe that
electrical equipment is not in conformity with the safety
objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I, he
shall not place the electrical equipment on the market until it
has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where the elec­
trical equipment presents a risk, the importer shall inform the
manufacturer and the market surveillance authorities to that
effect.

3.
Importers shall indicate on the electrical equipment their
name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the
postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is
not possible, on its packaging or in a document accompanying
the electrical equipment. The contact details shall be in a
language easily understood by end-users and market surveillance
authorities.

4.
Importers shall ensure that the electrical equipment is
accompanied by instructions and safety information in a
language which can be easily understood by consumers and
other end-users, as determined by the Member State concerned.

5.
Importers shall ensure that, while electrical equipment is
under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do
not jeopardise its compliance with the safety objectives referred
to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I.

6.
When deemed appropriate with regard to the risks
presented by electrical equipment, importers shall, to protect
the health and safety of consumers, carry out sample testing
of electrical equipment made available on the market, inves­
tigate and, if necessary, keep a register of complaints, of nonconforming electrical equipment and electrical equipment
recalls, and shall keep distributors informed of any such moni­
toring.

7.
Importers who consider or have reason to believe that
electrical equipment which they have placed on the market is
not in conformity with this Directive shall immediately take the
corrective measures necessary to bring that electrical equipment
into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appropriate.
Furthermore, where the electrical equipment presents a risk,
importers shall immediately inform the competent national
authorities of the Member States in which they made the elec­
trical equipment available on the market to that effect, giving
details, in particular, of the non-compliance and of any
corrective measures taken.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

8.
Importers shall, for 10 years after the electrical equipment
has been placed on the market, keep a copy of the EU
declaration of conformity at the disposal of the market
surveillance authorities and ensure that the technical documen­
tation can be made available to those authorities, upon request.

9.
Importers shall, further to a reasoned request from a
competent national authority, provide it with all the
information and documentation in paper or electronic form
necessary to demonstrate the conformity of electrical
equipment in a language which can be easily understood by
that authority. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its
request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by
electrical equipment which they have placed on the market.

L 96/363

they made the electrical equipment available on the market to
that effect, giving details, in particular, of the non-compliance
and of any corrective measures taken.

5.
Distributors shall, further to a reasoned request from a
competent national authority, provide it with all the
information and documentation in paper or electronic form
necessary to demonstrate the conformity of electrical
equipment. They shall cooperate with that authority, at its
request, on any action taken to eliminate the risks posed by
electrical equipment which they have made available on the
market.

Article 10
Article 9
Obligations of distributors
1.
When making electrical equipment available on the
market distributors shall act with due care in relation to the
requirements of this Directive.

2.
Before making electrical equipment available on the
market distributors shall verify that the electrical equipment
bears the CE marking, that it is accompanied by the required
documents and by instructions and safety information in a
language which can be easily understood by consumers and
other end-users in the Member State in which the electrical
equipment is to be made available on the market, and that
the manufacturer and the importer have complied with the
requirements set out in Article 6(5) and (6) and Article 8(3)
respectively.

Where a distributor considers or has reason to believe that
electrical equipment is not in conformity with the safety
objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I, he
shall not make the electrical equipment available on the market
until it has been brought into conformity. Furthermore, where
the electrical equipment presents a risk, the distributor shall
inform the manufacturer or the importer to that effect as well
as the market surveillance authorities.

3.
Distributors shall ensure that, while electrical equipment is
under their responsibility, its storage or transport conditions do
not jeopardise its compliance with the safety objectives referred
to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I.

Cases in which obligations of manufacturers apply to
importers and distributors
An importer or distributor shall be considered a manufacturer
for the purposes of this Directive and he shall be subject to the
obligations of the manufacturer under Article 6, where he
places electrical equipment on the market under his name or
trade mark or modifies electrical equipment already placed on
the market in such a way that compliance with this Directive
may be affected.

Article 11
Identification of economic operators
Economic operators shall, on request, identify the following to
the market surveillance authorities:

(a) any economic operator who has supplied them with elec­
trical equipment;

(b) any economic operator to whom they have supplied elec­
trical equipment.

Economic operators shall be able to present the information
referred to in the first paragraph for 10 years after they have
been supplied with the electrical equipment and for 10 years
after they have supplied the electrical equipment.

CHAPTER 3
CONFORMITY OF THE ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT

Article 12
4.
Distributors who consider or have reason to believe that
electrical equipment which they have made available on the
market is not in conformity with this Directive shall make
sure that the corrective measures necessary to bring that
equipment into conformity, to withdraw it or recall it, if appro­
priate, are taken. Furthermore, where the electrical equipment
presents a risk, distributors shall immediately inform the
competent national authorities of the Member States in which

Presumption of conformity on the basis of harmonised
standards
Electrical equipment which is in conformity with harmonised
standards or parts thereof the references of which have been
published in the Official Journal of the European Union shall be
presumed to be in conformity with the safety objectives referred
to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I covered by those
standards or parts thereof.

L 96/364

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 13
Presumption of conformity on the basis of international
standards
1.
Where harmonised standards referred to in Article 12
have not been drawn up and published, the Member States
shall take all appropriate measures to ensure that, for the
purposes of making available on the market or free
movement as referred to in Articles 3 and 4 respectively,
their competent authorities shall also regard as complying
with the safety objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out
in Annex I electrical equipment which complies with the safety
provisions of the international standards set out by the Inter­
national Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) in respect of which
the publication procedure laid down in paragraphs 2 and 3 of
this Article has been applied.

2.
The safety provisions referred to in paragraph 1 shall be
notified to the Member States by the Commission. The
Commission, after consulting the Member States, shall state
the safety provisions and in particular the variants thereof
which it recommends to be published.

29.3.2014

2.
The EU declaration of conformity shall have the model
structure set out in Annex IV, shall contain the elements
specified in Module A as set out in Annex III and shall be
continuously updated. It shall be translated into the language
or languages required by the Member State in which the elec­
trical equipment is placed or made available on the market.

3.
Where electrical equipment is subject to more than one
Union act requiring an EU declaration of conformity, a single
EU declaration of conformity shall be drawn up in respect of all
such Union acts. That declaration shall contain the identification
of the Union acts concerned including their publication refer­
ences.

4.
By drawing up the EU declaration of conformity, the
manufacturer shall assume responsibility for the compliance
of the electrical equipment with the requirements laid down
in this Directive.

Article 16
General principles of the CE marking
3.
The Member States shall inform the Commission within a
period of three months of any objections they may have to the
safety provisions notified in accordance with paragraph 2,
stating the safety grounds on account of which the provisions
should not be recognised.

The CE marking shall be subject to the general principles set out
in Article 30 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008.

Article 17
Rules and conditions for affixing the CE marking
For purposes of information the references of the safety
provisions against which no objection has been raised shall
be published in the Official Journal of the European Union.

1.
The CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and
indelibly to the electrical equipment or to its data plate.
Where that is not possible or not warranted on account of
the nature of the electrical equipment, it shall be affixed to
the packaging and to the accompanying documents.

Article 14
Presumption of conformity on the basis of national
standards
Where harmonised standards referred to in Article 12 have not
been drawn up and published and international standards
referred to in Article 13 have not been published, the
Member States shall take all appropriate measures to ensure
that, for the purpose of making available on the market or
free movement as referred to in Articles 3 and 4 respectively,
their competent authorities shall also regard as complying with
the safety objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in
Annex I electrical equipment manufactured in accordance with
the safety provisions of the standards in force in the Member
State of manufacture, if it ensures a safety level equivalent to
that required in their own territory.

2.
The CE marking shall be affixed before the electrical
equipment is placed on the market.

3.
Member States shall build upon existing mechanisms to
ensure correct application of the regime governing the CE
marking and shall take appropriate action in the event of
improper use of that marking.

CHAPTER 4
UNION MARKET SURVEILLANCE, CONTROL OF ELECTRICAL
EQUIPMENT ENTERING THE UNION MARKET AND UNION
SAFEGUARD PROCEDURE

Article 15

Article 18

EU declaration of conformity

Union market surveillance and control of electrical
equipment entering the Union market

1.
The EU declaration of conformity shall state that the
fulfilment of the safety objectives referred to in Article 3 and
set out in Annex I has been demonstrated.

Article 15(3) and Articles 16 to 29 of Regulation (EC)
No 765/2008 shall apply to electrical equipment.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

Article 19
Procedure for dealing with electrical equipment presenting
a risk at national level
1.
Where the market surveillance authorities of one Member
State have sufficient reason to believe that electrical equipment
covered by this Directive presents a risk to the health or safety
of persons or domestic animals, or to property, they shall carry
out an evaluation in relation to the electrical equipment
concerned covering all relevant requirements laid down in this
Directive. The relevant economic operators shall cooperate as
necessary with the market surveillance authorities for that
purpose.

Where, in the course of the evaluation referred to in the first
subparagraph, the market surveillance authorities find that the
electrical equipment does not comply with the requirements laid
down in this Directive, they shall without delay require the
relevant economic operator to take all appropriate corrective
actions to bring the electrical equipment into compliance with
those requirements, to withdraw the electrical equipment from
the market, or to recall it within a reasonable period, commen­
surate with the nature of the risk, as they may prescribe.

Article 21 of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 shall apply to the
measures referred to in the second subparagraph of this para­
graph.

2.
Where the market surveillance authorities consider that
non-compliance is not restricted to their national territory,
they shall inform the Commission and the other Member
States of the results of the evaluation and of the actions
which they have required the economic operator to take.

3.
The economic operator shall ensure that all appropriate
corrective action is taken in respect of electrical equipment
concerned that it has made available on the market throughout
the Union.

4.
Where the relevant economic operator does not take
adequate corrective action within the period referred to in the
second subparagraph of paragraph 1, the market surveillance
authorities shall take all appropriate provisional measures to
prohibit or restrict the electrical equipment’s being made
available on their national market, to withdraw the electrical
equipment from that market or to recall it.

The market surveillance authorities shall inform the
Commission and the other Member States, without delay, of
those measures.

5.
The information referred to in the second subparagraph of
paragraph 4 shall include all available details, in particular the

L 96/365

data necessary for the identification of the non-compliant elec­
trical equipment, the origin of the electrical equipment, the
nature of the non-compliance alleged and the risk involved,
the nature and duration of the national measures taken and
the arguments put forward by the relevant economic
operator. In particular, the market surveillance authorities shall
indicate whether the non-compliance is due to either of the
following:

(a) failure of the electrical equipment to meet the safety
objectives referred to in Article 3 and set out in Annex I
relating to the health or safety of persons or domestic
animals, or to property; or

(b) shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in
Article 12 or in the international or national standards
referred to in Articles 13 and 14 conferring a presumption
of conformity.

6.
Member States other than the Member State initiating the
procedure under this Article shall without delay inform the
Commission and the other Member States of any measures
adopted and of any additional information at their disposal
relating to the non-compliance of the electrical equipment
concerned, and, in the event of disagreement with the
adopted national measure, of their objections.

7.
Where, within three months of receipt of the information
referred to in the second subparagraph of paragraph 4, no
objection has been raised by either a Member State or the
Commission in respect of a provisional measure taken by a
Member State, that measure shall be deemed justified.

8.
Member States shall ensure that appropriate restrictive
measures are taken in respect of the electrical equipment
concerned such as withdrawal of the electrical equipment
from the market, without delay.

Article 20
Union safeguard procedure
1.
Where, on completion of the procedure set out in
Article 19(3) and (4), objections are raised against a measure
taken by a Member State, or where the Commission considers a
national measure to be contrary to Union legislation, the
Commission shall without delay enter into consultation with
the Member States and the relevant economic operator or
operators and shall evaluate the national measure. On the
basis of the results of that evaluation, the Commission shall
adopt an implementing act determining whether the national
measure is justified or not.

The Commission shall address its decision to all Member States
and shall immediately communicate it to them and the relevant
economic operator or operators.

L 96/366

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

2.
If the national measure is considered justified, all Member
States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that the noncompliant electrical equipment is withdrawn from their market,
and shall inform the Commission accordingly. If the national
measure is considered unjustified, the Member State concerned
shall withdraw that measure.

3.
Where the national measure is considered justified and the
non-compliance of the electrical equipment is attributed to
shortcomings in the harmonised standards referred to in point
(b) of Article 19(5) of this Directive, the Commission shall
apply the procedure provided for in Article 11 of Regulation
(EU) No 1025/2012.

29.3.2014

animals or of property, the Commission shall adopt
immediately applicable implementing acts in accordance with
the procedure referred to in Article 23(3).
5.
The Commission shall address its decision to all Member
States and shall immediately communicate it to them and the
relevant economic operator or operators.
Article 22
Formal non-compliance
1.
Without prejudice to Article 19, where a Member State
makes one of the following findings, it shall require the relevant
economic operator to put an end to the non-compliance
concerned:

Article 21
Compliant electrical equipment which presents a risk
1.
Where, having carried out an evaluation under
Article 19(1), a Member State finds that although electrical
equipment is in compliance with this Directive, it presents a
risk to the health or safety of persons, or to domestic animals
or to property it shall require the relevant economic operator to
take all appropriate measures to ensure that the electrical
equipment concerned, when placed on the market, no longer
presents that risk, to withdraw the electrical equipment from the
market or to recall it within a reasonable period, commensurate
with the nature of the risk, as it may prescribe.

2.
The economic operator shall ensure that corrective action
is taken in respect of all electrical equipment concerned that he
has made available on the market throughout the Union.

3.
The Member State shall immediately inform the
Commission and the other Member States. That information
shall include all available details, in particular the data
necessary for the identification of the electrical equipment
concerned, the origin and the supply chain of the electrical
equipment, the nature of the risk involved and the nature and
duration of the national measures taken.

4.
The Commission shall without delay enter into consul­
tation with the Member States and the relevant economic
operator or operators and shall evaluate the national measures
taken. On the basis of the results of that evaluation, the
Commission shall decide by means of implementing acts
whether the national measure is justified or not, and where
necessary, propose appropriate measures.

(a) the CE marking has been affixed in violation of Article 30
of Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 or of Article 17 of this
Directive;
(b) the CE marking has not been affixed;
(c) the EU declaration of conformity has not been drawn up;
(d) the EU declaration of conformity has not been drawn up
correctly;
(e) technical documentation is either not available or not
complete;
(f) the information referred to in Article 6(6) or Article 8(3) is
absent, false or incomplete;
(g) any other administrative requirement provided for in
Article 6 or Article 8 is not fulfilled.
2.
Where the non-compliance referred to in paragraph 1
persists, the Member State concerned shall take all appropriate
measures to restrict or prohibit the electrical equipment being
made available on the market or ensure that it is recalled or
withdrawn from the market.
CHAPTER 5
COMMITTEE, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 23
The implementing acts referred to in the first subparagraph of
this paragraph shall be adopted in accordance with the exam­
ination procedure referred to in Article 23(2).

On duly justified imperative grounds of urgency relating to the
protection of health and safety of persons, or of domestic

Committee procedure
1.
The Commission shall be assisted by the Committee on
Electrical Equipment. That committee shall be a committee
within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 182/2011.
2.
Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 5 of
Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 shall apply.

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

3.
Where reference is made to this paragraph, Article 8 of
Regulation (EU) No 182/2011, in conjunction with Article 5
thereof, shall apply.
4.
The committee shall be consulted by the Commission on
any matter for which consultation of sectoral experts is required
by Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 or by any other Union legis­
lation.
The committee may furthermore examine any other matter
concerning the application of this Directive raised either by its
chair or by a representative of a Member State in accordance
with its rules of procedure.

L 96/367

shall also include a statement that references in existing laws,
regulations and administrative provisions to the Directive
repealed by this Directive shall be construed as references to
this Directive. Member States shall determine how such
reference is to be made and how that statement is to be formu­
lated.
2.
Member States shall communicate to the Commission the
texts of the main provisions of national law which they adopt
in the field covered by this Directive.
Article 27
Repeal

Article 24
Penalties
Member States shall lay down rules on penalties, applicable to
infringements by economic operators of the provisions of
national law adopted pursuant to this Directive and shall take
all measures necessary to ensure that they are enforced. Such
rules may include criminal penalties for serious infringements.
The penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and
dissuasive.

Directive 2006/95/EC is repealed with effect from 20 April
2016, without prejudice to the obligations of the Member
States relating to the time-limits for transposition into
national law and the dates of application of the Directives set
out in Annex V.
References to the repealed Directive shall be construed as
references to this Directive and shall be read in accordance
with the correlation table in Annex VI.
Article 28

Article 25

Entry into force

Transitional provisions

This Directive shall enter into force on the twentieth day
following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the
European Union.

Member States shall not impede the making available on the
market of electrical equipment covered by Directive
2006/95/EC which is in conformity with that Directive and
which was placed on the market before 20 April 2016.
Article 26

Article 1, the second paragraph of Article 3, Article 5,
Article 13(2) and (3) and Annexes I, V and VI shall apply
from 20 April 2016.

Transposition
1.
Member States shall adopt and publish, by 19 April 2016,
the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to
comply with Article 2, the first paragraph of Article 3, Article 4,
Articles 6 to 12, Article 13(1), Articles 14 to 25 and Annexes
II, III and IV. They shall forthwith communicate the text of
those measures to the Commission.

Article 29
Addressees
This Directive is addressed to the Member States.
Done at Strasbourg, 26 February 2014.

They shall apply those measures from 20 April 2016.
When Member States adopt those measures, they shall contain a
reference to this Directive or be accompanied by such a
reference on the occasion of their official publication. They

For the European Parliament
The President

For the Council
The President

M. SCHULZ

D. KOURKOULAS

L 96/368

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX I
PRINCIPAL ELEMENTS OF THE SAFETY OBJECTIVES FOR ELECTRICAL EQUIPMENT DESIGNED FOR USE WITHIN
CERTAIN VOLTAGE LIMITS
1. General conditions
(a) the essential characteristics, the recognition and observance of which will ensure that electrical equipment will be
used safely and in applications for which it was made, shall be marked on the electrical equipment, or, if this is not
possible, on an accompanying document;
(b) the electrical equipment, together with its component parts, shall be made in such a way as to ensure that it can
be safely and properly assembled and connected;
(c) the electrical equipment shall be so designed and manufactured as to ensure that protection against the hazards set
out in points 2 and 3 is assured, providing that the equipment is used in applications for which it was made and is
adequately maintained.
2. Protection against hazards arising from the electrical equipment
Measures of a technical nature shall be laid down in accordance with point 1, in order to ensure that:
(a) persons and domestic animals are adequately protected against the danger of physical injury or other harm which
might be caused by direct or indirect contact;
(b) temperatures, arcs or radiation which would cause a danger, are not produced;
(c) persons, domestic animals and property are adequately protected against non-electrical dangers caused by the
electrical equipment which are revealed by experience;
(d) the insulation is suitable for foreseeable conditions.
3. Protection against hazards which may be caused by external influences on the electrical equipment
Technical measures shall be laid down in accordance with point 1, in order to ensure that the electrical equipment:
(a) meets the expected mechanical requirements in such a way that persons, domestic animals and property are not
endangered;
(b) is resistant to non-mechanical influences in expected environmental conditions, in such a way that persons,
domestic animals and property are not endangered;
(c) does not endanger persons, domestic animals and property in foreseeable conditions of overload.

29.3.2014

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX II
EQUIPMENT AND PHENOMENA OUTSIDE THE SCOPE OF THIS DIRECTIVE
Electrical equipment for use in an explosive atmosphere
Electrical equipment for radiology and medical purposes
Electrical parts for goods and passenger lifts
Electricity meters
Plugs and socket outlets for domestic use
Electric fence controllers
Radio-electrical interference
Specialised electrical equipment, for use on ships, aircraft or railways, which complies with the safety provisions drawn up
by international bodies in which the Member States participate.
Custom built evaluation kits destined for professionals to be used solely at research and development facilities for such
purposes.

L 96/369

EN

L 96/370

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX III
MODULE A
Internal production control
1.

Internal production control is the conformity assessment procedure whereby the manufacturer fulfils the obligations
laid down in points 2, 3 and 4, and ensures and declares on his sole responsibility that the electrical equipment
concerned satisfy the requirements of this Directive that apply to it.

2.

Technical documentation
The manufacturer shall establish the technical documentation. The documentation shall make it possible to assess the
electrical equipment’s conformity to the relevant requirements, and shall include an adequate analysis and assessment
of the risk(s). The technical documentation shall specify the applicable requirements and cover, as far as relevant for
the assessment, the design, manufacture and operation of the electrical equipment. The technical documentation
shall, where applicable, contain at least the following elements:
(a) a general description of the electrical equipment;
(b) conceptual design and manufacturing drawings and schemes of components, sub-assemblies, circuits, etc.;
(c) descriptions and explanations necessary for the understanding of those drawings and schemes and the operation
of the electrical equipment;
(d) a list of the harmonised standards applied in full or in part the references of which have been published in the
Official Journal of the European Union or international or national standards referred to in Articles 13 and 14 and,
where those harmonised standards or international or national standards have not been applied, descriptions of
the solutions adopted to meet the safety objectives of this Directive, including a list of other relevant technical
specifications applied. In the event of partly applied harmonised standards or international or national standards
referred to in Articles 13 and 14, the technical documentation shall specify the parts which have been applied;
(e) results of design calculations made, examinations carried out, etc.; and
(f) test reports.

3.

Manufacturing
The manufacturer shall take all measures necessary so that the manufacturing process and its monitoring ensure
compliance of the manufactured electrical equipment with the technical documentation referred to in point 2 and
with the requirements of this Directive that apply to it.

4.

CE marking and EU declaration of conformity

4.1. The manufacturer shall affix the CE marking to each individual electrical equipment that satisfies the applicable
requirements of this Directive.
4.2. The manufacturer shall draw up a written EU declaration of conformity for a product model and keep it together
with the technical documentation at the disposal of the national market surveillance authorities for 10 years after the
electrical equipment has been placed on the market. The EU declaration of conformity shall identify the electrical
equipment for which it has been drawn up.
A copy of the EU declaration of conformity shall be made available to the relevant market surveillance authorities
upon request.
5.

Authorised representative
The manufacturer’s obligations set out in point 4 may be fulfilled by his authorised representative, on his behalf and
under his responsibility, provided that they are specified in the mandate.

29.3.2014

29.3.2014

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

ANNEX IV
EU DECLARATION OF CONFORMITY (No XXXX) (1)
1. Product model/product (product, type, batch or serial number):
2. Name and address of the manufacturer or his authorised representative:
3. This declaration of conformity is issued under the sole responsibility of the manufacturer.
4. Object of the declaration (identification of electrical equipment allowing traceability; it may include a colour image of
sufficient clarity where necessary for the identification of the electrical equipment):
5. The object of the declaration described above is in conformity with the relevant Union harmonisation legislation:
6. References to the relevant harmonised standards used or references to the other technical specifications in relation to
which conformity is declared:
7. Additional information:
Signed for and on behalf of:
(place and date of issue):
(name, function) (signature):

(1) It is optional for the manufacturer to assign a number to the declaration of conformity.

L 96/371

L 96/372

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

29.3.2014

ANNEX V
Time-limits for transposition into national law and dates of application of the Directives set out in Part B of
Annex V to Directive 2006/95/EC
(referred to in Article 27)
Directive

Time-limit for transposition

Date of application

73/23/EEC

21 August 1974 (1)

—

93/68/EEC

1 July 1994

1 January 1995 (2)

(1) In the case of Denmark the time-limit was extended to five years, i.e. 21 February 1978. See Article 13(1) of Directive 73/23/EEC.
(2) Until 1 January 1997 Member States had to allow the placing on the market and the bringing into service of products which complied
with the marking arrangements in force before 1 January 1995. See Article 14(2) of Directive 93/68/EEC.

EN

29.3.2014

Official Journal of the European Union

L 96/373

ANNEX VI
CORRELATION TABLE
Directive 2006/95/EC

This Directive

Article 1

Second paragraph of Article 1

Article 2

Article 3

Article 3

Article 4

Article 4

Article 5

Article 5

Article 12

Article 6

Article 13

Article 7

Article 14

Article 8(1)

Articles 16 and 17

Article 8(2)

—

Article 8(3)

—

Article 9

Articles 18 to 20

Article 10

Articles 16 and 17

Article 11

—

Article 12

—

Article 13

Article 26(2)

Article 14

Article 27

Article 15

Article 28

Annex I

Annex I

Annex II

Annex II

Annex III

Articles 15 and 16 and Annex IV

Annex IV

Annex III

Annex V

Annex V

L 96/374

EN

Official Journal of the European Union

STATEMENT OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
The European Parliament considers that only when and in so far as implementing acts in the sense of
Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 are discussed in meetings of committees, can the latter be considered as
‘comitology committees’ within the meaning of Annex I to the Framework Agreement on the relations
between the European Parliament and the European Commission. Meetings of committees thus fall within
the scope of point 15 of the Framework Agreement when and insofar as other issues are discussed.

__________________________________

29.3.2014

